Abstract
A human thiamine pyrophosphokinase cDNA clone (hTPK1) was isolated and sequenced. When the intact hTPK1 open reading frame was expressed as a histidine-tag fusion protein in Escherichia coli, marked enzyme activity was detected in the bacterial cells. The hTPK1 mRNA was widely expressed in various human tissues at a very low level, and the mRNA content in cultured fibroblasts was unaffected by the thiamine concentration of the medium. The chromosome localization of the hTPK1 gene was assigned to 7q34.

Keywords
Thiamine pyrophosphokinase; Thiamine; Thiamine pyrophosphate; Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia; 7q34; Human
Vitamin B1, or thiamine, is necessary in the nutrition of vertebrates [1]. In animals, thiamine is absorbed from the gut, transported into cells, and converted into the coenzyme form, thiamine pyrophosphate (TDP) [1] and [2]. TDP serves as a transient intermediate carrier of the aldehyde group in the reactions of TDP-dependent enzymes such as pyruvate dehydrogenase, 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, transketolase, and others [3]. In addition to its coenzymatic function, thiamine may have a specific role in neuronal activity [4] and [5]. Thiamine triphosphate (TTP) was recently found to be required as the phosphate donor for the phosphorylation of 43K rapsyn of the postsynaptic membrane of the Torpedo electric organ [6]. Since TDP-dependent enzymes are essential in carbohydrate metabolism and TDP is the precursor for TTP, the utilization and pyrophosphorylation of thiamine are of critical significance to cell viability and function in vertebrates. For instance, the high-affinity thiamine transport protein, THTR-1, was identified as the gene mutated in thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia (TRMA) with diabetes and deafness [7], [8] and [9].

The pyrophosphorylation of thiamine is catalyzed by thiamine pyrophosphokinase (TPK; EC 2.7.6.2) with ATP and magnesium ion. TPKs in animal tissues have been studied by many investigators and purified from human red blood cells, pig heart and pig brain [10], [11] and [12]. However, the metabolism and the expression of TPK in higher animals are still poorly understood. Recently, we isolated a mouse TPK cDNA (mTPK1) and demonstrated that the mode of expression of the mTPK1 gene differs with cell type [13]. In this study, we isolated a cDNA encoding human TPK (hTPK1) and analyzed the steady-state mRNA levels in various human tissues and in fibroblast cells from a patient with TRMA. In addition, we assigned the chromosomal localization of the hTPK1 gene to 7q34. It is expected that basic scientific research using the hTPK1 cDNA will enhance the understanding of human thiamine metabolism.

The SuperScript human liver cDNA library (Life Technologies) was screened by colony hybridization using an mTPK1 open reading frame (ORF) that had been labeled with [a-32P]dCTP (3000 Ci/mmol) (ICN Biomedicals) following the random primer labeling procedure. Four positive clones were obtained from 6×104 independent clones. These four clones were subjected to sequencing with a 377 DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems) and two clones contained an identical cDNA whose nucleotide sequence was very similar to mTPK1. However, the insert DNA from the two clones did not include the putative translation start codon. To obtain the full-length cDNA, 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA end was performed using a SMART RACE cDNA Amplification Kit (Clontech) with a specific oligonucleotide 5'-CAGGAATAAGGCCACACCAATCACCCTCC (corresponds to nucleotides (nt) 580–552). The full-length transcript was 2345 bp in length and contained a single ORF of 729 bp with a 5'-untranslated region of 18 bp and a 3'-noncoding region of 1598 bp. The translation start codon of the ORF conformed to Kozak’s rules [14], and two putative polyadenylation sites, AATAAA [15], were found in the 3'-untranslated region (nt 1296 and 2328). It was noticed not only that 86% of the nucleotide sequence of the human ORF was identical with mTPK1 ORF, but also that the 3'-noncoding region of both cDNAs were very similar over their approx. 1.6 kb length (55% identity) ( Fig. 1A). This suggests that the presently cloned cDNA was a human orthologue of mTPK1, and therefore the cDNA was termed hTPK1.

Full-size image (21 K)
Fig. 1. 
Sequence comparison of human and mouse TPKs. (A) Schematic comparison of the hTPK1 and mTPK1 cDNAs. The putative polyadenylation site that is conserved between hTPK1 and mTPK1 is shown by an arrowhead. The level of the conservation of ORF and the 3'-noncoding region is indicated as the percentage of the hTPK1 nucleotides that is identical to mTPK1. Numbers on the upside of the bar indicate nucleotide position. (B) Amino acid sequence of the hTPK1 protein with mTPK1 (accession No. AB027568) aligned using the ClustalW program (http://www2.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/). Identical residues are indicated by an asterisk and similar residues are indicated by a dot. Numbers on the right side of the figure indicate amino acid position.
Figure options
The predicted protein encoded by the hTPK1 ORF contained 243 amino acid residues whose sequence showed 89% identity with that of the mTPK1 product ( Fig. 1B). The calculated molecular weight of the putative hTPK1 protein was 27?265. This value was similar to the determined molecular mass of the purified TPK polypeptide from human red blood cells (28 kDa) [10]. To determine whether the hTPK1 protein generates TPK activity, we attempted to express the hTPK1 protein with an N-terminal His-tag in Escherichia coli, in which TPK does not exist and TDP is synthesized from thiamine monophosphate (TMP) by TMP kinase (EC 2.7.4.16) [16]. As shown in Fig. 2, a 32 kDa band, which was consistent with the expected size, appeared in the extract of cells inducing the His-tag fusion protein by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Concurrently, TPK activities in the sufficiently dialyzed crude extracts were measured by procedures described previously [17]. The marked activity (3.1 nmol of TDP produced per min/mg of protein) was observed in the cells expressing the fusion protein, while no enzyme activity was detected in the uninduced cells. This finding indicated that hTPK1 ORF actually encodes a human TPK. In addition, we compared the elution volume of TPK activity with those of standard proteins by gel filtration analysis. The molecular weight of the His-tagged hTPK1 fusion protein was estimated to be 62?000 (data not shown), suggesting that the native human TPK exists in the dimer form of identical subunits.

Full-size image (36 K)
Fig. 2. 
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the His-tagged hTPK1 fusion protein expressed in E. coli. A bacterial expression vector coding for a recombinant hTPK1 protein with a six histidine-tag (His-tag) at the N-terminus, pRSET-hTPK1, was made by inserting hTPK1-ORF into pRSET B (Invitrogen). The E. coli strain BL21(DE3)pLysS bearing pRSET-hTPK1 was grown overnight at 37°C in 2 ml of Luria-Bertani medium containing 50 µg/ml of ampicillin, pelleted, and grown for 2 h in 20 ml of fresh medium. The cells were further shaken at 28°C for 2 h with 0.1 mM isopropyl-ß-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) to induce the recombinant protein. The preparation of the bacterial soluble crude extract was done by procedures described previously [17]. Crude extracts (10 µg of protein) of IPTG-induced bacterial cells (lane 3) and uninduced cells (lane 2) were analyzed using 7.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, followed by Coomassie blue staining. The position of the predicted His-tagged hTPK1 fusion protein is indicated by an arrow. Lane 1 shows molecular standard proteins (Bio-Rad): phosphorylase b (97?400), bovine serum albumin (66?200), ovalbumin (45?000), carbonic anhydrase (31?200), soybean trypsin inhibitor (21?500), and lysozyme (14?500).
Figure options
Next, we examined the tissue distribution and relative abundance of the hTPK1 gene using a human multi-tissue Northern blot. As shown in Fig. 3A, weak signals of a 2.5 kb band were detected in various tissues after long exposure. The hTPK1 message was widely expressed at a very low level, and was relatively abundant in heart, kidney and peripheral leukocytes. Considering its ubiquitous expression in a wide variety of human tissues, hTPK1 appears to be a housekeeping gene in humans. This finding was in contrast to mouse TPK (mTPK1) whose mRNA level is expressed in a tissue-specific manner and is found at high levels in the kidney and liver [13].

Full-size image (48 K)
Fig. 3. 
Expression pattern of hTPK1. (A) Detection of hTPK1 mRNA in human tissues. A multiple tissue Northern blot containing 2 µg of poly(A)+RNA per lane (Clontech) was hybridized with the 32P-labeled hTPK1-ORF and the human ß-actin cDNA as an internal control. The washed membrane was exposed to X-OMAT AR film (Kodak) for 2 weeks (hTPK1) or 2 days (ß-actin) at -80°C. RNA size markers are indicated on the right. (B) Detection of a hTPK1 transcript in human fibroblasts. Total RNAs isolated from human normal and TRMA cells cultured either in thiamine-sufficient (S) or -deficient (D) medium using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen) were treated with deoxyribonuclease (Takara, Otsu, Japan) to eliminate residual genomic DNA. The first-strand cDNA was synthesized from 5 µg of total RNA in a total volume of 50 µl with the SuperScript Preamplification System (Life Technologies). The synthesized cDNA (2 µl) was subsequently subjected to PCR in a total volume of 25 µl containing 5 pmol of each primer and 1 unit of KOD-Dash polymerase (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan). The primers used were: 5'-ATGGAGCATGCCTTTACCCC and 5'-GCTTTTGATGGCCATGGTCC for hTPK1; 5'-ACCACAGTCCATGCCATCAC and 5'-TCCACCACCCTGTTGCTGTA for G3PDH. PCR was carried out by denaturation at 94°C for 15 s, annealing at 54°C for 2 s, and extension at 74°C for 30 s. After 30 (hTPK1) or 25 (G3PDH) cycles, 3 µl of the amplified product were fractionated on a 2% agarose gel and stained with ethidium bromide. The DNA molecular weight marker (100 bp ladder) appears in the first lane from the left.
Figure options
TRMA with diabetes and deafness is an early onset, autosomal recessive disorder responding to pharmacological doses of thiamine [18] and [19]. Many features of TRMA patients without thiamine treatment are raised by low intracellular thiamine concentrations due to the genetic defect in the high-affinity thiamine transport protein, although these features are not identical to those of dietary thiamine deficiency. Rindi et al. reported previously that erythrocytes from TRMA had a small but reproducible reduction in TPK activity [20]. Thus, it was of interest to compare the steady-state hTPK1 mRNA levels in fibroblasts from normal subjects and patients with TRMA to gain insight into the contribution of intracellular thiamine content to the hTPK1 expression. Normal human dermal fibroblast cells were purchased from Cell Systems (Kirkland, WA). TRMA fibroblast cells were obtained from a skin biopsy of a Japanese patient [21]. This Japanese patient possesses a nonsense homozygous mutation in the THTR-1 gene, predicting a premature truncated protein [7]. After these human cells were cultured for 10 days at 37°C in 5% CO2 in thiamine-sufficient (10 µM) or thiamine-deficient (3 nM) special Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium [13], the intracellular concentrations of thiamine derivatives and the hTPK1 mRNA levels were evaluated. Total thiamine concentrations in human plasma and cerebrospinal fluid are reported to be 14–30 nM and 49–56 nM, respectively [1]. On the other hand, Stagg et al. found that TRMA fibroblasts showed morphologic changes and subsequently died after 5–14 days of thiamine starvation (less than 9 nM of thiamine in the culture medium) [22]. In the present study, although the morphology of the TRMA cells did not change within 10 days under the thiamine-deficient condition (3 nM), the total thiamine content in the TRMA cells was considerably decreased compared with normal cells ( Table 1). In addition, the ratio of TDP to total thiamine content in the TRMA cells was slightly reduced. However, as shown in Fig. 3B, there was no detectable difference in the hTPK1 mRNA levels between the normal and the TRMA fibroblast and both mRNA contents were unaffected by the thiamine concentration of the medium. These findings suggested that the hTPK1 expression is not injured in TRMA and thiamine or a thiamine derivative does not participate in the regulation of the hTPK1 expression in human cells.

Table 1.
Content of thiamine derivatives in normal and TRMA fibroblastsa
Cell type	Thiamine in culture medium (µM)	Intracellular concentration (pmol/106 cells)	TDP/total thiamine (%)
Thiamine	TMP	TDP	
Normal	10	24.1	4.2	167.4	85.5
0.003	19.7	2.0	84.8	79.6
TRMA	10	20.0	1.8	62.9	74.3
0.003	9.1	ndb	27.3	75.0
The harvested fibroblasts were washed twice with cold 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.5) and then suspended in the same buffer. The cell suspension was heated at 85°C for 15 min, and deproteinized with trichloroacetic acid (5% of final concentration). After centrifugation, trichloroacetic acid was removed twice by extraction of ethyl ether. The content of thiamine and its phosphates were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography after conversion to the corresponding thiochrome as described previously [26].
a
Each value is the mean from two experiments.
b
Not detected.
Table options
To determine the chromosomal location of the hTPK1 gene, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed using full-length hTPK1 cDNA. We examined 20 typical replication G-banded metaphase spreads. As shown in Fig. 4, specific twin-spot signals were detected to the q34 band of chromosome 7, and no twin-spot signals were observed on other chromosomes. Thus, these results localized the human hTPK1 gene to 7q34. We also found that the almost entire nucleotide sequence of the hTPK1 gene was already determined as a part of the Human Genome Project, although the exon division corresponding to the first 60 bp of the hTPK1 transcript and the 5'-upstream region of the gene were not yet resolved ( Fig. 5). This genomic contig Hs_71577 maps to chromosome 7q34-36. A comparison of the nucleotide sequence of Hs7_1577 and hTPK1 cDNA has enabled us to deduce the exon-intron organization of the gene. These exon-intron boundaries conform to consensus donor-acceptor sequences (gt/ag) for RNA splicing. The hTPK1 gene spans in excess of 365 kb, and comprises at least eight exons and seven introns. Mustapha et al. reported that the defect in a sensorineural progressive autosomal recessive deafness, DFNB13, is mapped to chromosome 7q34-36 with a significant LOD score for markers D7S498 and D7S676 [23]. Since these markers are located at or near the hTPK1 gene ( Fig. 5), it will be interesting to explore whether the mutations in the DFNB13 patients are present in the hTPK1 cDNA. Sensorineural deafness is one of three definitive clinical characteristics in TRMA, and the intracellular TDP level is low in both cases: the dysfunction of high-affinity thiamine transport protein and TPK.

Full-size image (17 K)
Fig. 4. 
Chromosomal localization of hTPK1 by FISH. Replication G-banded metaphase chromosomes were prepared from the phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocytes of a normal male donor by a thymidine synchronization/bromodeoxyuridine release technique [24]. The 2.3 kb hTPK1 cDNA probe was labeled by nick translation using biotin-16-dUTP (Boehringer Mannheim), and FISH was performed as previously described [25]. Fluorescein isothiocyanate signals and replicate G-bands for the same metaphase were detected under fluorescence microscopy (Nikon, Tokyo) through a B-2A filter and a UV-2A filter, respectively.
Figure options
Full-size image (10 K)
Fig. 5. 
Partial organization of the hTPK1 gene. Genomic contig Hs7_1577 (472?748 bp, accession No. NT_001431) is schematically represented by the open bar at the top of the diagram. Black boxes represent the protein coding regions of exons, and a shadowed box represents the 3'-untranslated region. The nucleotide positions of the exon junctions in the hTPK1 cDNA are indicated. Genotyping markers located in the contig are shown by arrowheads.
Figure options
We express our gratitude to the Japanese patient and her family. This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) 11671133 from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of Japan.