Abstract
Background: Thiamin pyrophosphokinase (TPK) catalyzes the transfer of a pyrophosphate group from ATP to vitamin B1 (thiamin) to form the coenzyme thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP). Thus, TPK is important for the formation of a coenzyme required for central metabolic functions. TPK has no sequence homologs in the PDB and functions by an unknown mechanism. The TPK structure has been determined as a significant step toward elucidating its catalytic action.

Results: The crystal structure of Saccharomyces cerevisiae TPK complexed with thiamin has been determined at 1.8 ≈ resolution. TPK is a homodimer, and each subunit consists of two domains. One domain resembles a Rossman fold with four a helices on each side of a 6 strand parallel ﬂ sheet. The other domain has one 4 strand and one 6 strand antiparallel ﬂ sheet, which form a flattened sandwich structure containing a jelly-roll topology. The active site is located in a cleft at the dimer interface and is formed from residues from domains of both subunits. The TPK dimer contains two compound active sites at the subunit interface.

Conclusions: The structure of TPK with one substrate bound identifies the location of the thiamin binding site and probable catalytic residues. The structure also suggests a likely binding site for ATP. These findings are further supported by TPK sequence homologies. Although possessing no significant sequence homology with other pyrophospokinases, thiamin pyrophosphokinase may operate by a mechanism of pyrophosphoryl transfer similar to those described for pyrophosphokinases functioning in nucleotide biosynthesis.

Keywords
Thiamin; pyrophosphokinase; X-ray crystallography; multiwavelength anomalous dispersion; metabolism
Introduction
Thiamin (vitamin B1) exists in four possible forms: free thiamin, thiamin monophosphate (TMP), thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP), and thiamin triphosphate [1]. The predominant form is the active coenzyme TPP. TPP is essential for enzymes in carbohydrate metabolism. Such enzymes include transketolase, required for the pentose phosphate pathway, pyruvate dehydrogenase, required for the synthesis of acetyl-CoA, and a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, required for the tricarboxylic acid cycle. TPP is also required for the biosynthesis of isoleucine and valine and is utilized by the branched-chain a-ketoacid dehydrogenase in amino acid catabolism [2].

In all organisms, external thiamin phosphates are hydrolyzed to thiamin prior to uptake. After transport into the cell, thiamin is directly pyrophosphorylated to TPP by thiamin pyrophosphokinase (TPK; Figure 1). ATP is the pyrophosphate donor. Unlike most eukaryotes, which rely on dietary thiamin, yeast and bacteria can synthesize thiamin de novo [3]. The de novo synthetic pathway produces TMP from hydroxyethylthiazole phosphate and hydroxymethylpyrimidine pyrophosphate. In yeast, TMP is then hydrolyzed to thiamin before undergoing the same pyrophosphorylation reaction as extracellular sources of thiamin. Thus, null mutation of TPK is lethal in S. cerevisiae [4] and S. pombe [5]. In S. pombe, TPK is not only involved in thiamin metabolism but also plays a part in the regulation of phosphate metabolism, mating, and cell growth [5].

Full-size image (26 K)
Figure 1. 
The reaction catalyzed by TPK
The thiamin numbering scheme is shown in red
Figure options
Because thiamin-dependent enzymes are crucial for central metabolic pathways, changes in thiamin regulation can affect many different processes. Thiamin deficiency has been linked to impaired neurological functions [6], which manifest in humans as beriberi and Wernicke encephalopathy [7]. Altered thiamin levels are also found in chronic alcoholics [8].

Although thiamin-dependent enzymes have been studied extensively by biochemical and crystallographic methods, the enzyme that produces this essential coenzyme has received much less attention. The S. cerevisiae THI80 gene encoding a 37 kDa protein was the first TPK to be cloned [4]. TPK associates as a dimer 9 and 10. A kinetic study concluded that both substrates combined with the enzyme before product release and implicated the quaternary nitrogen in the thiazolium ring in the formation of a crucial interaction between thiamin and TPK [11].

Only recently have the first pyrophosphokinase crystal structures of 7,8-dihydro-6-hydroxymethypterin pyrophosphokinase (HPPK; 12, 13, 14 and 15) and phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRPP; [16]) been determined. While TPK shares no apparent sequence homology with these enzymes, functional similarities can be identified. HPPK is a single-domain monomer of 18 kDa that is essential for de novo folate biosynthesis and that catalyzes the transfer of the pyrophosphate group from ATP to a pterin compound. Recent studies also suggest similarities between the membrane bound carriers of folates and thiamin [17]. PRPP catalyzes the transfer of a pyrophosphate group from ATP to ribose 5-phosphate during pyrimidine and purine biosynthesis, but it functions through an active site that spans two domains in a hexameric assembly of 33 kDa subunits. Here we present the first thiamin pyrophosphokinase structure as a complex with thiamin.

Results and Discussion
Sequence Similarities
TPK homologs have been reported for S. cerevisiae [4], S. pombe [5], and the mouse [18]. The S. cerevisiae TPK shares 26%ñ27% sequence identity with that of the mouse and S. pombe. ?-BLAST [19] searches also identified a 264 residue sequence from A. thaliana (see GenBank accession number gi|7488367|) that shares 26% sequence identity with yeast TPK and a 332 residue sequence from D. menalogaster [20] that shares 19% sequence identity with S. cerevisiae TPK. The alignment of these TPK sequences (Figure 2) shows several stretches containing residues conserved across all or most of the sequences. Many of the conserved residues are located in the catalytic site and the dimer interface (see below).

Full-size image (128 K)
Figure 2. 
A sequence alignment of TPKs from different species is shown.
The alignment was prepared with CLUSTAL W [47]. Strictly conserved residues are highlighted in yellow. Secondary structural elements are indicated in green by a box for an a helix and an arrow for a ﬂ strand. Residues important for dimer formation are shown in red, and those that participate in the catalytic site are in blue. The GGXGG motif is underlined
Figure options
Structure Determination
The structure of TPK from S. cerevisiae has been determined at 1.8 ≈ as a complex with thiamin. Multiwavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD) data were collected from a crystal subject to a short soak with sodium bromide (Table 1) [21]. Twelve bromide ions were located in the asymmetric unit. More than 90% of the amino acid sequence could be traced into the experimental electron density map. A native data set was used for subsequent refinement at 1.8 ≈ resolution. The current TPK model contains all of the 319 residues of one subunit, all but the two N-terminal residues of the other subunit, two thiamin molecules, and 671 water molecules. A summary of refinement statistics is given in Table 1.

Table 1.
TPK Data Collection, Structure Solution, and Refinement Statistics
Native	Br MAD Inflection	Br MAD Peak	Br MAD Remote
Resolution (≈)	30ñ1.8	30ñ2.0	30ñ2.0	30ñ2.0
(1.86ñ1.80)	(2.07ñ2.00)	(2.07ñ2.00)	(2.07ñ2.00)
Wavelength (≈)	1.5418	0.9198	0.9196	0.8265
Observation (total/unique)	303,494/61,167	336,932/90,965	339,782/90,911	337,945/90,634
Completeness (%)	94.0 (74.1)	99.3 (99.2)	99.6 (99.3)	99.3 (99.9)
Rmerge	0.041 (0.383)	0.055 (0.203)	0.061 (0.228)	0.067 (0.228)
I/SigI	30.5 (2.7)	19.1 (7.1)	19.7 (5.7)	15.6 (6.1)
Protein atoms	5,124		5,110	
Solvent atoms	671		392	
Thiamin molecules	2		2	
R (Rfree)	0.217 (0.234)		0.239 (0.266)	
Rmsd bonds (≈)	0.004		0.010	
Rmsd angles (∞)	1.3		1.7	
Ramachandran most favored (%)	86.3		86.0	
Ramachandran allowed (%)	13.3		13.5	
Values in parentheses are for the highest-resolution shell. Values for MAD data are from SCALEPACK, with Bijvoet pairs kept separate in scaling. Rmerge = S|I - <I>|/SI, where I is the integrated intensity of a given reflection. The refinement residual R = S|Fobs - Fcalc|/SFobs, with the cross validating Rfree calculated from 4.9% of reflections excluded from refinement.
Table options
Overall Structure
TPK is a homodimer, with each monomer comprised of an aﬂ domain and a ﬂ sandwich domain containing a jelly-roll topology (Figure 3). The aﬂ domain is constructed from an open, twisted ﬂ sheet formed from six parallel strands surrounded by helices on both sides. It can be partly described in terms of a ﬂaﬂaﬂ motif like that of the Rossman fold commonly found in nucleotide binding proteins [22]. The second domain comprises two ﬂ sheets composed of four and six ﬂ strands each in an antiparallel arrangement and combined in a flattened sandwich. The two domains are positioned end to end and form an extended, twisted, mixed ﬂ sheet of 10 strands.

Full-size image (180 K)
Figure 3. 
Structure of TPK
(A) Stereo diagram of the Ca trace of the TPK monomer.
(B) Stereo diagram of the ribbon trace of the TPK monomer.
(C) Ribbon diagram showing the TPK dimer viewed down the 2-fold noncrystallographic axis.
(D) Ribbon diagram of the TPK dimer viewed perpendicular to the 2-fold noncrystallographic axis. Thiamin is shown in (C) and (D) as a ball-and-stick model with C, N, O, and S atoms colored yellow, blue, red, and green, respectively.
The figures were created with MOLSCRIPT [48]
Figure options
Both domains contribute to the dimeric association. The subunits are arranged about the noncrystallographic dyad axis such that interactions between the ﬂ domains are central in the dimer interface with the two aﬂ domains pointing away at approximately right angles to each other. More than 2,460 ≈ of solvent-accessible surface area is buried in the dimer interface. The main elements in contact between subunits are two turns from the ﬂ domains (ﬂ10-ﬂ11 and ﬂ12-ﬂ13). For example, the Ca atoms of Gly257 from the two monomers are less than 4 ≈ apart. The a helix aK from the bottom of the aﬂ domain is another important element of the dimer interface. This helix lies between ﬂ7 and ﬂ8 within the same monomer and between ﬂ13 and ﬂ10 from the ﬂ domain of the other subunit. The functional importance of these interactions is further supported by the strong conservation of many of these residues between different species (Figure 2).

Thiamin Binding
The position and conformation of the bound thiamin molecule was clearly defined in the experimental electron density map (Figure 4). A groove is formed between the two subunits in the dimer interface, with one thiamin bound at each end of the groove. The thiamin binding site is primarily defined by ﬂ strand ﬂ12a and ﬂ bulge ﬂ13a from the ﬂ sandwich domain of one subunit and by loop ﬂ5b-aFb from the aﬂ domain of the other subunit. Thiamin is enclosed by an interaction between the side chains of Glu7a and Tyr123b (Figure 4). The positively charged thiazolium ring makes contacts to the mainchain carbonyl oxygen atoms of residues Gln122b (3.0 ≈ to N3) and Ser286a (3.6 ≈ to N3). The aminopyrimidine ring makes a p-stacking interaction with Trp270a at a distance of 3.5 ≈ and makes van der Waals contacts with aromatic residues Tyr123b and Trp275a. Other contacts to the aminopyrimidine ring include one between the side-chain oxygen of Ser285a and N1A (2.7 ≈), one between the main-chain O of Gln122b and N4A (3.0 ≈), and a water-mediated network between Trp275a and N3A. The hydroxyethyl tail also makes a water-mediated contact with the nitrogen and carboxyl oxygen atoms of Asp126b.

Full-size image (72 K)
Figure 4. 
Active site of TPK
(A) An experimental electron density map in the active site shows thiamin and the representative residue Trp270. The map is calculated at 2.0 ≈ and contoured at 1.2 s. Atoms C, N, O, and S are colored orange, blue, red, and green, respectively.
(B) Stereodiagram showing the main interactions around thiamin. Hydrogen bonds are shown as dotted lines. C atoms are colored yellow, N is blue, and O is in red. The figure was created with MOLSCRIPT [48]
Figure options
The carbonyl contact of Gln122b to N3 puts Tyr123b in a position to make the hydrogen bonding contact to Glu7a and may be responsible for anchoring the loop ﬂ5b-aFb close to thiamin. In the absence of thiamin this hydrogen bond may not form, and thus the binding site may open for substrate access. The formation of contacts between the side chains of Glu7a, Trp270a, and Tyr123b may also be coupled with the stacking of the aminopyrimidine ring against Trp270a. Many of the residues that interact with thiamin are conserved between species (Figure 2). Other residues, such as Ser124b and Ser287a, make main chain interactions with thiamin.

Although rotation about the linking methylene of thiamin is theoretically unhindered, thiamin and its derivatives in crystal structures adopt only three conformations. These are defined in terms of the torsion angle of the thiazolium and pyrimidine rings across the methylene bridge; fT = C5A-C7A-N3-C2, and fP = N3-C7A-C5A-C4A [23] (See Figure 1 for numbering). Free thiamin assumes the F form, with fT ? 0∞ and fP ? ±90∞, which corresponds to the energetic minimum [24]. In TPP-dependent enzymes 25, 26 and 27, TPP adopts the high-energy V conformation, where fT ? ±90∞ and fP ? ±90∞. Thiamin binds to TPK in the F form, and it has torsion angles of 1∞ and -79∞ for fT and fP, respectively. This is the first reported case of a thiamin moiety bound into an enzyme in the F conformation. The observation that thiamin in the active site of TPK is more like free thiamin than TPP is explicable in terms of the catalytic function of the respective enzymes. In TPP-dependent enzymes, reactions involve C2 of the thiazolium ring. In the V conformation, C2 is brought close to the amino group of the pyridinium ring to facilitate carbanion formation. In contrast, the formation of TPP from thiamin in TPK entails the transfer of a pyrophosphate group to the end of the hydroxyethyl tail. Relative ring orientations appear to play no active part in activating the hydroxyethyl group; therefore, no overall gain results from straining the molecule.

Other pyrophosphokinases have been proposed as possible targets for antimicrobial-agent development [15], and the requirement of TPK in essential processes in yeast suggests that inhibitors of this enzyme would make potentially powerful fungicidal agents. Nonconserved residues close to the active site include Glu7 and Tyr123, both intimately involved with thiamin binding, and Cys5, Trp275, and Arg289, all of which may exert steric and/or electronic influences on binding thiamin analogs and so may bear investigation in the design of species-specific inhibitors.

Probable ATP Binding Site
The site for ATP binding is likely to occur near the thiamin hydroxyethyl tail, which points into a solvent-accessible region of the intersubunit groove having approximate dimensions of 10 ◊ 14 ◊ 10 ≈3. This space is lined with conserved residues, including Asn45b, Gln46b, Asp69b, Asp97b, Ser100b, Gln122b, Thr125b, Asp126b, Lys129b, Arg195b, Gln198b, and Ser287a (Figure 2). In TPK, three aspartic acid residues (69b, 97b, and 126b) could serve the same role as the HPPK aspartic acid residues, which coordinate magnesium ions and make contacts to the substrates that are crucial to the pyrophosphoryl transfer [15].

The thiamin hydroxyl group is 5.4 ≈ from the carboxyl group of Asp126b. This distance could give reasonable O-Mg-O bond lengths with very little movement of either the hydroxyethyl tail or the amino acid side chain, and it suggests that the observed conformation could readily accommodate ATP binding. Kinetic studies have shown a broad specificity of TPK for a variety of ribonucleotide triphosphates as pyrophosphate donors [11]. This may indicate no strong specific interactions between ATP and the enzyme beyond the binding of the pyrophosphate group, as in hydroxyethylthiazole kinase (ThiK), another kinase in the thiamin biosynthetic pathway [28]. Attempts to cocrystallize TPK with AMP and the ATP analog AMPCPP, or to soak these nucleotides into a TPK crystal, have failed to show evidence of nucleotide binding. This may in part be due to the nucleotide's high Km [11], possibly coupled with the presence of high concentrations of sulfate or phosphate ions that complex Mg2+, or perhaps a conformational change in the protein is prevented either by crystal packing and/or the presence of thiamin.

Similar Fold Domains
The two other reported pyrophosphokinases incorporate aﬂ structures resembling that in TPK. In HPPK, p stacking with an aromatic side chain is an important substrate interaction, but the substrates sit against the flat surface of the ﬂ sheet rather than at the ends of the strands [15]. The active site of PRPP is located in a cleft between two domains, and the adenosine group of ATP forms a p interaction with a phenyl group. However, there is no sequence homology between the three pyrophosphokinases and, although all have clusters of aspartate residues implicated in Mg2+ and pyrophosphate binding, these residues are found on different secondary-structural elements.

A large number of structural homologs to TPK, including small-molecule kinases such as ThiK and adenosine kinase, were identified via a DALI [29] search of the Protein Data Bank. While the individual TPK domains are common elements in many proteins, none of the homologs showed the same combination of the two domains.

The TPP-dependent enzymes pyruvate decarboxylase 30 and 31, transketolase 25 and 32, pyruvate oxidase [26], benzoylformate decarboxylase [34], and branched-chain a-ketoacid dehydrogenase [27] contain an aﬂ domain. In these enzymes, the coenzyme N1A atom interacts with the side chain of a glutamate residue [33]. Generally, domains from TPP-dependent enzymes align with the TPK aﬂ domain with rmsd values between 1.2 ≈ and 2.5 ≈. Four to six ﬂ strands align well, but thiamin and TPP do not overlay in the compared active sites, with the C2 atoms of the substrates commonly in the order of 15 ≈ apart. Thiamin adopts the unstrained F conformation in TPK, as discussed above, and N1A contacts a serine rather than a glutamate residue. These differences corrrelate to the functions of the proteins since the strained cofactor conformation and proximity of the glutamate to N1A are crucial for catalysis in TPP-dependent enzymes 34 and 35 but probably play no part in the pyrophosphorylation of thiamin.

Many nucleotide binding proteins, including oxidoreductases 36 and 37 and transferases 28 and 38, contain the Rossman fold [22]. A glycine-rich motif (GGXGG) present on loop ﬂ6-aK in TPK is reminiscent of the Rossman fold GXGXXG ìfingerprintî sequence [37], which, with a helix dipole, participates in binding the pyrophosphate group of nucleotides. In the nucleotide binding proteins the substrates, which also bind at the carboxyl ends of the ﬂ strands, do not overlay well with thiamin in TPK. The aﬂ domains of pyrophosphokinases as well as TPP-dependent and nucleotide binding proteins bind substrates with pyrophosphate groups, though their catalytic processes are dissimilar. The lack of sequence homology and the mismatch of ligand binding sites between TPK and the other proteins indicate that, rather than any evolutionary relationship, a common and stable structural unit has simply been adapted to a range of purposes.

The TPK ﬂ sandwich shows similarity to dTDP-6-deoxy-D-xylo-4-hexulose 3,5 epimerase (RmlC), an epimerase involved in bacterial cell wall synthesis [39]. Similar to the thiamin binding site in TPK, the nucleotide binding site for RmlC is at the edge of two ﬂ sheets and features p stacking between a deoxythymidine ring and aromatic side chains. But the comparison is general, as the active site is on the opposite side of the ﬂ domain to TPK.

Biological Implications
TPP is a coenzyme essential for life. In yeast and eukaryotes TPP is only produced by TPK, which catalyzes the transfer of the pyrophosphate group from ATP to thiamin. Thus TPK, as proposed for other pyrophosphokinases, is a potential target for the development of novel antimicrobial agents. The structure of TPK complexed with thiamin reveals only general structural similarities to other pyrophosphokinases, with which TPK shares no sequence identity. These enzymes may represent a case of convergent evolution. No structural homologs of TPK have been found that contain the same combination of domains as TPK, though individual domain homologs have been identified in small-molecule kinases, TPP-dependent enzymes, and nucleotide binding enzymes. These similarities probably represent a case in which a stable structural unit has been adapted to a range of functions rather than any evolutionary relationship.

The catalytic site was located from the position of thiamin. This structure represents the first time a thiamin compound binds to a protein in the F conformation. Probable residues involved with ATP and Mg2+ binding have been identified by comparison with other pyrophosphokinases and sequence homologies. Such residues include an aspartate cluster. TPK may thus operate by a similar mechanism of pyrophosphoryl transfer to that described for pyrophosphokinases functioning in nucleotide biosynthesis.

Close to the active site, several nonconserved residues, including two intimately involved with thiamin binding, have been identified that might prove useful in the development of species' specific thiamin analogs. While more full-length TPK sequences need to be elucidated, the less-than-30% identity between yeast and mouse TPK is an encouraging indicator of the possible useful variability between human and pathogen sequences. The structure of TPK has thus identified potential residue targets for selectively inhibiting TPK in different species, which could lead to the design of a powerful fungicide.

Experimental Procedures
Crystallization
TPK from S. cerevisiae was overexpressed as a polyHis-tagged protein in E. coli strain BL21(DE3) with the pET28a vector (Novagen). The TPK was purified with metal chelate chromatography (Pharmacia) with an imidazole elution. Purified protein was dialyzed against 150 mM NaCl prior to concentration.

Crystals of the complex of native TPK with thiamin were grown at room temperature by the hanging-drop vapor diffusion method. Each drop contained 2 µl of 10 mg/mL protein solution, 1 µl of a 200 mM thiamin solution, and 3 µl of a reservoir solution of 19% PEGMME 2000, 100 mM ammonium sulfate, and 100 mM sodium acetate at pH 5.1. Crystals appeared within a week and grew to full size within 3ñ4 weeks.

Crystal Soaking with NaBr and Cryo-Cooling
Crystals of the native TPK and thiamin complex were flash cooled in gaseous nitrogen at 100 K in a solution of 20% PEGMME350 and 80% reservoir solution. Bromide derivatives were prepared by rapid immersion of the crystal for 45 s in a solution of 1 M NaBr dissolved in 25% PEGMME2000, 100 mM ammonium sulfate, 100 mM sodium acetate at pH 5.1, and 50 mM NaCl [22]. The crystal was then mounted for flash cooling in Paratone N oil (Exxon Oil Co.). This treatment minimized the effects of high bromide concentrations on absorption and background X-ray scattering.

Data Collection and Processing
A data set of the native TPK complexed with thiamin was collected at 100 K on a Rigaku II Cu rotating anode equipped with Raxis IIc image plate detectors. The crystal had dimensions 0.2 ◊ 0.2 ◊ 0.3 mm3. The crystal was found to belong to the orthorhombic space group P21212 with unit cell dimensions of a = 118.31, b = 130.84, and View the MathML source. Diffraction data were integrated and scaled with DENZO and SCALEPACK [40].

MAD data were collected from Br--soaked crystal at beamline 19ID of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory. Data were collected from a single crystal cooled to 100 K at wavelengths near the Br K edge corresponding to the peak and inflection point of the measured X-ray fluorescence spectrum and at a high-energy remote wavelength (Table 1). Translating the crystal in the beam prior to measurement of the third wavelength circumvented the effects of evident radiation decay. The HKL2000 [40] program suite was used for data processing.

MAD Phasing, Model Building, and Refinement
A partial structure of 12 Br- sites was determined with SOLVE [41]. A Matthews coefficient of 2.4 ≈3/Da was calculated under the assumption of one dimer in the asymmetric unit. The Br- positions were further refined and initial phases were calculated to 2.0 ≈ with MLPHARE [40]. The data were treated as a special case of the multiple isomorphous-replacement method [42]. The position of the 2-fold NCS operator was determined with O [43] based on correlated features of the electron density map. Density modification and 2-fold NCS averaging was performed with DM [44]. The initial TPK model built into this density comprised 594 amino acids, 2 thiamin molecules, and 12 bromide ions. This model gave an initial R factor of 0.410 View the MathML source calculated to 2.0 ≈. Missing were the His-tag residues from both subunits and several loop regions. The model was refined by the use of simulated annealing, Powell minimization, and individual B factor refinement with CNS [45]. During two rounds of model building in O and refinement, the model was extended to include the missing residues and 392 waters. This gave an R factor of 0.239 View the MathML source. The regions of poorest density comprise Gly15 to Ile22 and Ile148 to Leu153, which are two of the longer loop regions in the structure. This model, less the water molecules and bromide ions, was refined against the native data set to 1.8 ≈ with rigid-body, minimization, and B factor refinement. Five rounds of model building in O, refinement, and automated water building with CNS yielded the current model with an R factor of 0.217 View the MathML source. Structure quality was assessed with PROCHECK [46] and showed 86% of residues in the most-favored regions of the Ramachandran plot. The average B factor for thiamin molecules refined at full occupancy was 21.9 ≈2, whereas the average value in the protein was 28.6 ≈2.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Norma Duke for assistance with data collection, Xinhua Ji for sharing coordinates of HPPK prior to release, Boli Huang for work on cloning and expression of TPK, Heather Mueller for technical assistance, and Drs Tom Hurley, Jean Hamilton, and Nic Steussy for helpful discussions and suggestions. R.A.H. was supported by NIH grant DK19259. D.E.T. was supported by NIH grant DK54738 and a grant from the Indiana Alcohol Research Centre. L.J.B. was supported by a post-doctoral fellowship from the American Heart Association, Midwest Affiliate.

Accession Numbers
The coordinates for the structure of S. cerevisiae TPK complexed with thiamin have been deposited with the Protein Data Bank, accession number 1IG0.