NADP is essential for biosynthetic pathways, en-ergy, and signal transduction. Its synthesis is cata-lyzed by NAD kinase. Very little is known about the
structure, function, and regulation of this enzyme
from multicellular organisms. We identified a human
NAD kinase cDNA and the corresponding gene using
available database information. A cDNA was amplified
from a human fibroblast cDNA library and function-ally overexpressed inEscherichia coli.The obtained
cDNA, slightly different from that deposited in the
database, encodes a protein of 49 kDa. The gene is
expressed in most human tissues, but not in skeletal
muscle. Human NAD kinase differs considerably from
that of prokaryotes by subunit molecular mass (49 kDa
vs 30 –35 kDa). The catalytically active homotetramer
is highly selective for its substrates, NAD and ATP. It
did not phosphorylate the nicotinic acid derivative of
NAD (NAAD) suggesting that the potent calcium-mobilizing pyridine nucleotide NAADP is synthesized
by an alternative route. © 2001 Academic Press
The importance of NAD and NADP as electron car-riers in energy metabolism has long been known. A
large number of studies have also established the role
of these coenzymes in signal transduction pathways
(reviewed in Ref. 1). NAD is a substrate for two differ-ent types of covalent protein modifications. Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation participates in the regulation of a variety
of nuclear processes including base excision repair and
transcription control (1–3). MonoADP ribosylation rep-resents a mechanism for enzyme regulation in the cy-tosol (4) and in mitochondria (5) and does also influ-ence extracellular processes (6). Furthermore, NAD
and NADP can be converted into the calcium mobiliz-ing agents cADPR, cADPRP, or NAADP (7, 8). It has
been suggested that NAD kinase could convert NAAD,
a physiological intermediate of NAD synthesis, to
NAADP, a highly potent intracellular calcium-mobilizing agent (1, 9 –11). The cyclic nucleotides
(cADPR and cADPRP) are synthesized by ADP ribosyl
cyclase (7–12). There is evidence that this enzyme may
also synthesize NAADP by catalyzing the exchange of
nicotinamide for nicotinic acid in NADP (7, 8). How-ever, this reaction requires a low pH and a rather high
concentration of nicotinic acid. Moreover, in higher
eukaryotes the catalytic activity of known ADP-ribosyl
cyclases has been localized to the cell surface (7, 8).
Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that an alternative
biosynthetic pathway for the generation of NAADP
may exist.
In energy metabolism NADP is primarily required in
its reduced form as an electron donor for biosynthetic
reactions such as fatty acid or steroid synthesis. Im-portantly, this coenzyme is also an essential constitu-ent of cellular defense mechanisms against oxidative
stress. NADPH is the coenzyme for many enzymes
participating in detoxification reactions including glu-tathione reductase (13), thioredoxin reductase (14) and
cytochrome P450 reductase (15). The consequences of a
diminished NADPH concentration in mitochondria
were shown recently (16). An elevated level of reactive
oxygen species, DNA fragmentation, lipid peroxida-tion, and mitochondrial damage accompanied by a sig-nificant reduction of the cellular ATP concentration
was observed when expression of the mitochondrial
NADPH producing isoform of isocitrate dehydrogenase
was decreased.
The multiple functions of NADP in energy metabo-lism, signaling pathways and detoxification reactions
imply that regulation of its cellular concentration is
critical for cell survival. The final reactions leading to
NAD(P) synthesis are well known (17). However, only
very recently the first molecular characterization of an
enzyme of this pathway from a multicellular organism
was presented, namely, for the human nicotinamide
mononucleotide adenylyl transferase (18, 19). This en-zyme catalyzes the formation of NAD or NAAD from
Abbreviations used: cADPR(P), (29-phospho) cyclic ADP-ribose;
NAAD(P), nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide (phosphate);
NMN(AT), nicotinamide mononucleotide (adenylyl transferase).
1
To whom correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed.
Fax:149-30-8385 6509. E-mail: mziegler@chemie.fu-berlin.de.
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications288,69 –74 (2001)
doi:10.1006/bbrc.2001.5735, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on
69 0006-291X/01 $35.00
Copyright © 2001 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
ATP and NMN or NaMN, respectively. Primary struc-tures of NAD kinase from a few prokaryotes and the
yeastSaccharomyces cerevisiaewhere also established
only very recently (20 –22). The enzyme transfers a
phosphate group from ATP to NAD. This reaction rep-resents the only known way to generate NADP both in
prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
The activity of NAD kinase has been assigned to the
cytosol (23), although in yeast a mitochondrial form
may exist which accepts both NAD and NADH as sub-strate (24). The enzyme appears to be regulated by the
redox state of the cell, because NADPH inhibits the
enzyme’s catalytic activity (25). For plants, sea urchin
eggs and human neutrophils a stimulation of NAD
kinase activity by calcium/calmodulin was reported
(26 –28).
Given the important role of NADP(H) and thus of
NAD kinase in a variety of vital processes as well as its
potential function as a messenger enzyme we aimed
our study at identifying the primary structure of hu-man NAD kinase and the functional characteristics of
this enzyme. So far, very limited information, includ-ing essentially only some kinetic and physical charac-teristics of partially purified preparations from pigeon,
rabbit or bovine liver (25, 29 –31), has been available
for this enzyme from multicellular organisms. Here we
describe the cloning and functional overexpression of
the human enzyme inEscherichia coli.Tissue-specific
expression of the human NAD kinase was established
by Northern blot analysis. Kinetic and structural prop-erties of the enzyme were determined and were found
to be similar to the endogenous NAD kinase which we
partially purified from bovine liver. The mammalian
enzymes exhibited substantial differences to their
counterparts from lower organisms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Amplification and cloning of a cDNA encoding human NAD kinase.
Cytoplasmic RNA from SV-40 transformed lung fibroblasts (Wi 38)
was isolated as described in Ref. (32). Reverse transcription of 3mg
RNA was performed in RT buffer (Promega). The reaction mixture
contained 250mM dNTP, 40 U RNase inhibitor (Life Technologies),
and 140 U M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Promega) and was incu-bated at 37°C for 1 h. RNA was then digested by adding 40 U RNase
H (Takara). The primers for amplification of NAD kinase cDNA were
59-AAC GGC ATC AGT GTT TTT CTG-39 and 59-GAT TCG GGC
CTG GAT AGG-39. PCR was carried out for 35 cycles with an an-nealing temperature of 56°C. The PCR product was cloned into the
2.1-TOPO vector (Invitrogen) and transformed intoE. colicells ac-cording to the manufacturer’s protocol. For expression cloning the
cDNA encoding NAD kinase was amplified with a primer containing
aBamHI recognition site. The PCR product was phosphorylated,
restricted withBamHI and cloned into the pQE30 expression vector
(Quiagen) previously digested withSmaI andBamHI. Thereby, the
recombinant protein was provided with an N-terminal 63His-tag.
The vector construct was transformed intoE. coli(JM 109) cells.
DNA sequencing. DNA sequencing was performed with a Thermo
Sequenase fluorescence-labeled primer cycle sequencing kit (Sequi
Therm Excel II, Biozyme). Gels were run and analyzed on a DNA
sequencer model 4000L LI-COR (MWG-Biotech).
Expression and purification of recombinant human NAD kinase.
For overexpression the vector construct was transformed intoE. coli
(M15) cells. An overnight culture was transferred to 500 ml LB
medium with 100mg/ml ampicillin and 25mg/ml kanamycin. Over-expression was induced by adding isopropyl-b-thiogalactopyranoside
to a final concentration of 2 mM at an optical density of 0.6 (600 nm)
of the cells. After4hofexpression the cells were harvested and
sonicated in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.8). The cell lysate
was incubated for 5 min at 60°C. After centrifugation the superna-tant was applied to a DEAE column. The column was washed with
lysis buffer containing 100 mM NaCl and elution was carried out
with a gradient from 100 mM to 1 M NaCl in lysis buffer. Fractions
containing NAD kinase were pooled and loaded onto a nickel–
nitrilotriacetic acid column (Qiagen). The column was consecutively
washed with buffer A (50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, pH 8.5), with
buffer A containing 2 M NaCl and with buffer A containing 2 mM
imidazole. Elution was carried out with a gradient from 2 to 50 mM
imidazole in buffer A.
Partial purification of NAD kinase from bovine liver. Bovine liver
tissue was homogenized in a Waring blender with a buffer containing
20 mM Na2CO3, 20 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF,
pH 7.5. The homogenate was centrifuged for3hat30,000gand the
supernatant was incubated for 5 min at 60°C. After centrifugation
the supernatant was saturated with 60% ammonium sulfate. The
pellet was diluted with 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.8 and dialyzed
against the same buffer. This fraction was further purified by DEAE
chromatography as described above for the recombinant enzyme. For
some experiments further purification was afforded by affinity chro-matography using a Cibacron blue resin.
Enzyme assay. NAD kinase activity was assayed by measuring
the increasing absorbance at 340 nm caused by the reduction of
NADP to NADPH by glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The reac-tion was carried out in a solution containing 100 mM Tris–HCl, pH
7.8, 100 mM KCl, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM ATP, 2 mM
NAD, 1 mM glucose 6-phosphate, and 1 U glucose-6-phosphate de-hydrogenase. Required changes, e.g., for measurements in the pres-ence of substrate analogs, are indicated in the legends. When desired
Ca
21
or calmodulin were added to final concentrations of 1 mM and
250 units/ml, respectively.
If substrate analogs were used, nucleotides were analyzed using a
125 34-mm polyethylenimine column (Nucleosil 4000-7 PEI,
Macherey-Nagel) operated on an HPLC system (A¨
kta purifier,
Amersham–Pharmacia). Elution was performed isocratically in
buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4/acetic acid, pH 4.5) for 4 min
followed by a 15-min gradient to 70% buffer B (25 mM sodium
phosphate, pH 7.4, 2 M NaCl) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min.
Size-exclusion chromatography. Gel filtration was conducted us-ing a Superdex 200 HR 10/30 column (Amersham–Pharmacia) which
was run on the A¨kta purifier system. The buffer contained 50 mM
Tris–HCl, pH 7.8, 500 mM NaCl. For molecular weight estimation of
endogenous and recombinant NAD kinase the following proteins
were used for calibration: thyroglobulin (100mg), ferritin (20mg),
glutamic acid dehydrogenase (100mg), alcohol dehydrogenase (500
mg), bovine serum albumin (200 mg), and cytochrome c (20 mg).
Elution of the proteins was monitored at 280 nm. Elution of NAD
kinase was detected by assaying eluted fractions for enzyme activity.
Northern blot analysis. The cDNA probe was obtained by PCR of
an internal fragment encompassing nucleotides 563–962 of NAD
kinase cDNA. Two hundred nanograms of the PCR product was
labeled with 60 mCia-dCTP for4hat37°C and purified by gel
filtration. The blot containing RNAs from human tissues (OriGene)
was prehybridized for1hat60°C and hybridized with the cDNA
probe for 14 h at 60°C. After washing according to Ref. (32) the blot
was exposed to an X-ray film.
Kinetic measurements. The kinetic parameters of recombinant
human NAD kinase were determined assuming Michaelis–Menten
Vol. 288, No. 1, 2001 BIOCHEMICAL AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS
70
kinetics. Maximal velocity (Vmax) and KMvalues for NAD and ATP
were calculated by nonlinear regression analysis of the data using
the program SigmaStat. Experiments were conducted in assay me-dium described above at 30°C.
The dependence of enzyme activity on the temperature was deter-mined using the same medium. The influence of pH was tested at
30°C using Mes–HCl at pH 5.5–7.0 instead of Tris–HCl as buffer.
Gel electrophoresis. SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was
conducted according to Ref. (33) using 10% polyacrylamide slab gels.
Protein determination. Protein concentrations were determined
using either the biuret procedure or the BCA assay (Pierce) and
bovine serum albumin as standard.
RESULTS
To identify the primary structure of human NAD
kinase the two initially available protein sequences
from prokaryotic NAD kinases (20) were used for a
BLAST search of human EST sequences deposited in
available data bases (34). The sequences showed sim-ilarity to several eukaryotic proteins of unknown func-tion. A human hypothetical protein, FLJ13052 (Acces-sion No. NP_075394), exhibited significant homology to
the sequences used for comparison. In the meantime,
the sequences from E. coli(21) and S. cerevisiae(22)
have become available. They also exhibit similarity to
the human and the other two bacterial sequences. The
human cDNA sequence encoding this protein was used
to generate primers corresponding to the 59- and 39-terminal sequences of its putative open reading frame.
Using these primers a cDNA fragment with the ex-pected size of about 1400 bp was amplified from a
cDNA library prepared from human fibroblasts. This
product was cloned and sequenced. The obtained cDNA
comprised a sequence with a start codon including a
Kozak initiation sequence (ACAATGG) and an in-frame stop codon at nucleotide positions 1339 –1341.
The sequence was identical to the hypothetical protein
FLJ13052 with the exception of three differences. A
nucleotide exchange from A to G at position 1212 that
does not lead to an amino acid exchange, a nucleotide
exchange from C to A at position 786 that would
change an amino acid of the protein from asparagine to
lysine at position 262 and one missing GAG codon
reducing the C-terminal polyglutamate stretch from
ten to nine residues.
The protein encoded by the cloned cDNA contains
446 amino acids with a theoretical molecular mass of
49,228 Da. The protein was overexpressed inE. coli,
using an expression vector that endowed the protein
with an N-terminal 63His tag. The recombinant pro-tein was purified by two chromatographic steps (see
Materials and Methods). As shown in Fig. 1, the size of
the overexpressed protein, as estimated by SDS–
PAGE, coincided with that of the predicted polypep-tide. The purified protein catalyzed the synthesis of
NADP using NAD and ATP as substrates (see below)
and, therefore, represents indeed human NAD kinase.
The sequence of the cloned cDNA was used to search
a human genome database (34) in order to obtain in-formation about the chromosomal localization and or-ganization of the gene encoding NAD kinase. It was
found that the gene (GenBank Accession No.
AL031282) is located on chromosome 1 (1p36.21–
36.33). It represents a DNA stretch of about 14 kb
length. The coding region is contained in 11 exons
consisting of 85–180 bp, the introns being of variable
size ranging from 74 to 4641 bp.
Tissue-specific expression of the mRNA coding for
the protein was examined by Northern blot analysis
(Fig. 2). In most tissues tested a band was detected at
approximately 3 kb which corresponds to the NAD
FIG. 1. Overexpression of recombinant human NAD kinase in
Escherichia coli.Transfected cells were grown and expression in-duced as described under Materials and Methods. Following induc-tion for 0 (lane 1) or 3 h (lane 2) a sample of the bacterial pellet was
treated with sample buffer and subjected to SDS–PAGE. The sample
represented by lane 3 contained recombinant human NAD kinase
purified by Ni
21
–NTA and DEAE chromatography as described un-der Materials and Methods.
FIG. 2. Expression of NAD kinase mRNA in human tissues.
Northern blot analysis was performed as indicated under Materials
and Methods using a probe encompassing nucleotides 563–962 of the
human NAD kinase cDNA. Each lane of the blot contained 2mgof
mRNA isolated from the indicated tissue.
Vol. 288, No. 1, 2001 BIOCHEMICAL AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS
71
kinase cDNA. In several tissues a minor band of ap-proximately 1.8 kb of unknown origin was also labeled.
NAD kinase appears to be equally expressed in most
tissues. However, no expression of NAD kinase was
detected in skeletal muscle and only little in small
intestine tissue. In placenta a significantly enhanced
expression was observed.
Studies of bacterial NAD kinases revealed that these
enzymes consist of polypeptides with a subunit molec-ular mass of 30 –35 kDa (20, 21) as opposed to 49 kDa
of the human enzyme. Moreover, the yeast andE. coli
enzymes exist as hexamers (21, 22), whereas the hu-man protein apparently consists of only four subunits
that form the catalytically active enzyme. This conclu-sion was drawn from gel filtration experiments (Fig. 3).
Similar to the recombinant human NAD kinase, the
partially purified bovine enzyme also exhibited a na-tive molecular mass of about 200 kDa (Fig. 3). The
molecular masses of the recombinant human enzyme
and the partially purified bovine liver enzyme were
calculated to be about 190 and 210 kDa, respectively.
Analyses of the catalytic properties of the recombi-nant human enzyme (Table 1) established that the
substrate affinities for ATP (KM53.3 mM) and NAD
(KM50.54 mM) are similar to values previously re-ported for the enzyme from bovine liver and other
animal tissues (23). The specific activity was calculated
to be 6.7 mmol (min3mg)
21
. Both the recombinant
human enzyme and bovine liver NAD kinase exhibited
similar characteristics regarding the dependence of
their catalytic activities on pH and temperature (Table
1). Both enzymes are quite resistant to heat treatment.
This is indicated by the rather high temperature opti-mum of about 55°C (Table 1). Moreover, incubation at
60°C for 5 min resulted in a minimal loss (,5%) of
activity. The pH optimum is in the alkaline range (pH
7– 8). Under acidic conditions (pH,5.5), the enzyme is
readily inactivated.
Both the human and the bovine enzymes required
divalent cations for their catalytic activity. That is,
presumably the substrate nucleotides need to be com-plexes with bound divalent metal ions. The optimal
concentration of Mg
21
-ions was about 10 mM. Several
other metal ions were also efficient in supporting the
catalytic activity (Table 2). In fact, zinc and manganese
ions were preferred over Mg
21
. Copper and nickel ions
were not accepted.
Human NAD kinase appears to be highly selective
for its substrates, NAD and ATP. Although ATP could
be replaced by dATP, the specific activity using GTP as
phosphoryl donor amounted to less than one tenth of
that measured in the presence of ATP (Table 3). None
of the NAD analogs tested was phosphorylated in the
presence of ATP under the assay conditions used. That
is, modification of either the purine or the nicotinamide
FIG. 3. Molecular weight determination of catalytically active
bovine and recombinant human NAD kinases. Gel filtration of par-tially purified bovine liver or recombinant human NAD kinase was
conducted as described under Materials and Methods. The proteins
used for calibration (circles) were thyroglobulin (669 kDa), ferritin
(440 kDa), glutamic acid dehydrogenase (336 kDa), alcohol dehydro-genase (150 kDa), bovine serum albumin (67 kDa), and cytochromec
(12.3 kDa). The molecular weight of NAD kinases was calculated
according to the elution volume of fractions containing NAD kinase
activity.
TABLE 1
Physical and Kinetic Properties of Human NAD Kinase
Subunit molecular mass
(calculated)
49,228 Da
Subunit composition
(total molecular mass)
Homotetramer (200 kDa)
KMATP 3.3 mM
KMNAD 0.54 mM
Vmax 6.7mmol (min3mg protein)21
Temperature optimum 55°C
pH optimum 7.5 (7.0–8.0)
Note.NAD kinase activity was assayed by the enzymatic proce-dure as described under Materials and Methods.
TABLE 2
Influence of Metal Ions on the Catalytic Activity
of Human NAD Kinase
Mg21
100
Zn
21
350
Mn21
290
Co
21
70
Ca
21
28
Cu
21
n.d.
Ni
21
n.d.
Note.NAD kinase activity was assayed by the enzymatic proce-dure described under Materials and Methods in the presence of 1
mM indicated metal ion. The activities (in %) are given related to
that measured in the presence of 1 mM Mg
21
. In the absence of
divalent metal ions, no activity was detected. n.d., no detectable
activity.
Vol. 288, No. 1, 2001 BIOCHEMICAL AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS
72
moiety of NAD is sufficient to prevent phosphorylation
of the substrate (Table 3). Nevertheless, as indicated in
Table 3, these analogs apparently bind weakly to NAD
kinase, because they exerted some inhibition of NAD
phosphorylation. These observations also apply to
NAAD (Fig. 4) whose phosphorylation would lead to
the formation of the potent calcium-mobilizing agent
NAADP (9, 10). Phosphorylation of NAAD by NAD
kinase was attempted under several conditions includ-ing variations of pH or addition of calmodulin in the
absence or presence of Ca
21
. None of these conditions
led to any detectable formation of NAADP.
DISCUSSION
The present study has established the molecular
properties of human NAD kinase and has also provided
important physical and kinetic characteristics of this
enzyme. Although NAD kinase is essential to all or-ganisms and should be highly conserved, our results
have revealed significant differences to the enzymes
from prokaryotes and unicellular eukaryotes (20 –22,
35). First, the human enzyme has a subunit molecular
mass of about 49 kDa as opposed to about 30 –35 kDa
reported for those from prokaryotes. Moreover, subunit
molecular masses have been reported for partially pu-rified forms of the enzyme from mammalian and avian
liver (23) that are considerably different from the hu-man form. Perhaps, other proteins had been enriched
along with (far less amounts of) NAD kinase. In fact, in
our studies about 5000-fold enriched bovine liver NAD
kinase preparations contained two prominent protein
bands at about 35 and 60 kDa (not shown). Second, the
mammalian enzyme appears to be a catalytically active
homotetramer, rather than a hexamer, which has been
reported for the yeast andE. colienzymes. Third, the
human enzyme exhibits a very stringent substrate
specificity for NAD and ATP. For example, the bacte-rial and the two isoforms of NAD kinase detected in
Euglena gracilisreadily accepted GTP as phosphoryl
donor; oneEuglenaisoform even preferred GTP over
ATP (35). In contrast, the human enzyme uses GTP
only at a substantially lower rate (,10% compared to
ATP). None of the NAD analogs tested served as sub-strate for phosphorylation by the human enzyme.
Although the pathways of NAD(P) biosynthesis are
well known, physiological degradation of pyridine nu-cleotides has not been reported. To date, the only
known class of enzymes leading to specific degradation
of NAD(P) is represented by the bifunctional NAD
glycohydrolases/ADP-ribosyl cyclases, the products be-ing ADP-ribose (phosphate), or their cyclized forms (1,
7, 8, 12). However, the presence of an intracellular
enzyme of this kind has still to be clearly demon-strated, at least for mammalian cells. In any case, an
intracellular activity, if present, is very low. While
NAD may also be utilized by ADP-ribosylating en-zymes, NADP is not a substrate for these reactions.
Consequently, in the absence of a significant degrada-tion process there should be only a minimal require-ment to resynthesize NADP under normal physiologi-cal conditions. Indeed, NAD kinase activities detected
in mammalian tissues are rather low and amount to
FIG. 4. Human NAD kinase does not phosphorylate NAAD. Re-combinant human NAD kinase was incubated in the presence of 5
mM ATP and 1 mM NAD (curves 1 and 2) or 1 mM NAAD (curve 3).
Samples were incubated for 1 h (curves 1 and 3) or stopped at zero
time (curve 2) and immediately analyzed by HPLC as described
under Materials and Methods. The arrow indicates the elution vol-ume of NAADP as determined by separation of standard compounds.
Absorbance was measured at 254 nm. The chromatograms were
shifted along the ordinate to accommodate all three traces.
TABLE 3
Substrate Specificity of Human NAD Kinase
Substrate analog
Relative
activity (%)
a
Inhibition
(%)
b
GTP 7 0
dATP 103 —
3-Acetyl-pyridine adenine dinucleotide n.d. 30
3-Aldehyde-pyridine adenine dinucleotide n.d. 32
NAAD n.d. 37
Nicotinamide guanine dinucleotide n.d. 23
Nicotinamide hypoxanthine dinucleotide n.d. 24
ADP-ribose n.d. 0
Note.NAD kinase activity was assayed by the enzymatic proce-dure if NAD served as phosphoryl acceptor. HPLC analysis was
used, if NAD analogs were to be phosphorylated (see Materials and
Methods).
a
Phosphorylation of 1 mM NAD by 5 mM GTP or dATP or of NAD
analogs (at 1 mM) by 5 mM ATP was measured. The values were
related to the activity measured in the presence of 1 mM NAD and 5
mM ATP (100%).
b
The enzymatic NAD kinase assay was performed in the presence
of 0.2 mM NAD and 5 mM ATP and the indicated compound at 1 mM
concentration.
Vol. 288, No. 1, 2001 BIOCHEMICAL AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS
73
only a few nanomoles per hour and milligram of pro-tein, even following initial purification steps (24, 25).
This fact was also observed in the course of the present
study using bovine liver as enzyme source. On the
other hand, the gene encoding NAD kinase appears to
be expressed in most human tissues (Fig. 2). It is
interesting to note that the expression level is appar-ently elevated in placenta which would be in accor-dance with an increased demand for NADP of this
rapidly growing tissue. The absence of mRNA encoding
NAD kinase in skeletal muscle is in perfect agreement
with the well known metabolic specificity of this tissue.
That is, in skeletal muscle both the pentose phosphate
and the fatty acid synthetic pathways are virtually
absent. It is less obvious, why NAD kinase expression
in small intestine tissue is very low.
The specific activity of recombinant human NAD ki-nase amounted to about 6 –7mmol (min3mg)
21
, a value
that suggests that NAD kinase is indeed a low abundance
protein, if one considers the very low activity measured in
tissue extracts. The kinetic parameters also indicate that
the enzyme may be regulated by substrate availability,
because theKMvalues for both NAD and ATP (about 0.5
and 3 mM, respectively) are close to the physiological
concentrations of these nucleotides.
NAD kinase was found to be unable to catalyze phos-phorylation of the physiological intermediate NAAD,
at least under the conditions used. This conclusion
would clearly imply that another pathway should exist
that leads to NAADP synthesis. In this regard it was
also intriguing to test the reported stimulatory effect of
Ca
21
/calmodulin on NAD kinase activity. Besides not
promoting NAADP synthesis, these potential activa-tors had also no influence on NADP synthesis. This
observation is in apparent contradiction to reports of a
stimulation, at least regarding the human enzyme (28).
However, it might be possible that the previously noted
effect was indirect and perhaps mediated, for example,
by a calmodulin-dependent kinase