The ®nal two enzymes in the CoA biosynthetic pathway,
phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT; EC2.7.7.3) and
dephospho-CoA kinase (DPCK; EC 2.7.1.24), are separate
proteins in prokaryotes, but exist as a bifunctional enzyme in pig
liver. In the present studywe have obtained sequence information
from puri®ed pig-liver enzyme, and identi®ed the corresponding
cDNA in a number of species. The human gene localizes to
chromosome 17q12-21 and contains regions with sequence simi-INTRODUCTION
CoA is the principal acyl carrier in all living systems, and is
widely required in synthetic and degradative metabolic pathways
[1]. The ®ve-step pathway for CoAbiosynthesis frompantothenic
acid, cysteine andATP is common to all organisms [2]. The genes
encoding these enzymes have been identi®ed in bacteria (coaAto
coaE; [3±7]), but the corresponding genes in higher organisms
are less well characterized, with pantothenate kinase being the
only eukaryotic sequence yet described [8].
The ®nal two steps of the pathway are catalysed by phospho-pantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT; E.C. 2.7.7.3) and de-phospho-CoA (dPCoA) kinase (DPCK; EC2.7.1.24). The PPAT
reaction involves the reversible adenylation of 4«-phosphopante-theine to form 3«-dPCoA and PP
i
, and DPCK catalyses phos-phorylation of the 3«-hydroxy group of the ribose moiety of
dPCoA.
In yeast, the two enzymes are part of a large 350 kDa
multienzyme complex [9]. Studies inCorynebacterium ammoni-agenessuggested that separate enzymes were present [10], and
this was subsequently con®rmed on identi®cation of the bacterial
PPAT}coaD [6]. The crystal structure of the Escherichia coli
PPAT revealed a dimer of trimers, with each subunit displaying
a dinucleotide-binding fold [11]. The DPCK}coaEgene has also
been characterized fromE.coli, and encodes a 22 kDamonofunc-tional enzyme [7].
We have shown previously that the pig-liver PPAT andDPCK
reactions are catalysed by a bifunctional enzyme, originally
designated `CoA synthase' [12]. This migrated to 60 kDa on
SDS}PAGE, and initially appeared to be a homodimer, which
Abbreviations used: DPCK, dephospho-CoA kinase; dPCoA, dephospho-CoA; DTT, dithiothreitol ; EST, expressed sequence tag; MMLV, Moloney-murine-leukaemia virus; PPAT, phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase; TPCK, tosylphenylalanylchloromethane.
1
To whom correspondence should be addressed (e-mail mworrall!ucd.ie).
The nucleotide sequence data reported for the human and pig PPAT/DPCK cDNA will appear in DDBJ, EMBL, GenBank2and GSDB Nucleotide
Sequence Databases under the accession numbers AY094602 and AY094603 respectively.
larity to the monofunctional Escherichia coliDPCK and PPAT.
The recombinant 564-amino-acid human protein con®rmed the
associated transferase and kinase activities, and gave similar
kinetic properties to the wild-type pig enzyme.
Key words: bifunctional enzyme, CoA synthase, coenzyme A,
dephospho-CoA kinase.
was susceptible to proteolytic cleavage without loss of either
activity [13].
In the present study, we have isolated and sequenced the cyto-solic bifunctional pig-liver enzyme, and have identi®ed the
corresponding highly conserved gene in a range of species.
The puri®ed recombinant human enzyme behaved as a mono-meric 62 kDa protein, and con®rmed the associated transferase
and kinase activities.
EXPERIMENTAL
Materials
Tosylphenylalanylchloromethane (TPCK)-treated trypsin from
bovine pancreas,l-lactate dehydrogenase from rabbit muscle,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase from Leuconostoc mesen-teroides, pyruvate kinase from rabbit muscle, hexokinase from
baker's yeast, CoA, dPCoA and phosphoenolpyruvate were
purchased from Sigma±Aldrich Ireland Ltd (Dublin, Ireland).
NAD+and NADH were obtained from Roche Diagnostics Ltd
(Lewes, East Sussex, U.K.). Sephadex G-25 (®ne), Sepharose
CL-6B, DEAE-Sepharose and Superdex 200 HR10}30 were
from Amersham Biosciences (St Albans, Herts., U.K.). Re-striction endonucleasesBamHI andSalI were fromNewEngland
Biolabs (U.K.) Ltd (Hitchin, Herts., U.K.). Moloney-murine-leukaemia virus (MMLV) reverse transcriptase was from Pro-mega (Madison, WI, U.S.A.).PfuTurbo2DNAPolymerase and
BL-21(DE3) E. coli strain were obtained from Stratagene
(Amsterdam, The Netherlands). pCR22.1 and INVaF" cells
were from Invitrogen (San Diego, CA, U.S.A.). The expression
vector ptac
85 [14] was a gift from Professor P. C. Engel
#2002 Biochemical Society
14 S. Aghajanian and D. M. Worrall
(Department of Biochemistry, University College Dublin,
Ireland). All other chemicals were of analytical reagent grade.
Enzyme assays
All enzyme assays were performed at 25°C, and the change in
absorbance at 340 nm was monitored. One unit of activity was
determined as an amount of enzyme that converts 1lmol of
substrates into corresponding products.
PPAT activity was assayed in the reverse direction using
hexokinase and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase to couple
ATP production with NAD+reduction [15]. The assay mixture
(1 ml) consisted of 0.1 mM dPCoA, 2 mM PP
i
, 2 mM MgCl
#
,
1 mM NAD+, 5 mM glucose, 5 units of hexokinase and 1 unit of
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in 50 mM Tris}HCl buffer,
pH 8.0, containing 0.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT).
DPCK assays followed the production of ADP from dPCoA
and ATP using pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase as
coupling enzymes to generate NADH oxidation [16]. The assay
mixture (1 ml) consisted of 0.1 mM dPCoA, 2 mM ATP, 2 mM
MgCl
#
, 2.5 mM phosphoenolpyruvate, 0.2 mM NADH, 7 units
of pyruvate kinase and 5 units of lactate dehydrogenase in
50 mM Tris}HCl buffer, pH 8.0, containing 0.5 mM DTT.
Purification and sequencing of the wild-type pig-liver bifunctional
enzyme
The pig-liver enzyme was puri®ed as described previously [12].
Size-exclusion chromatography on FPLC Superdex 200 HR
10}30 was performed both as a ®nal puri®cation step and to
determine the molecular mass of the protein. The elution buffer
used was 50 mM Tris}HCl, pH 8.0, containing 150 mM NaCl
and 0.5 mM DTT.
The puri®ed 62 kDa material was subjected to N-terminal
protein sequencing following electroblotting on to a PVDF
membrane. Sequencing was performed using an Applied Bio-systems Procise HT protein sequencer (Warrington, Cheshire,
U.K.). For limited proteolysis, TPCK-treated trypsin (1%,
w}w) was incubated with the puri®ed protein for 10 min at
25°C, and the resulting 40 kDa and 22 kDa bands were also
transferred to PVDF for N-terminal sequencing. In addition, the
60 kDa band was fully cleaved with cyanogen bromide before
sequence analysis.
Cloning of the human geneppat/dpck
The cDNA was ampli®ed from HepG2 cells using reverse
transcriptase-PCR. Total RNA was prepared using the guani-dinium}phenol-extraction method [17] and ®rst-strand cDNA
was synthesized using MMLV reverse transcriptase. The
ppat}dpckgene was ampli®ed with a forward primer (5«-GGGG-ATCCATGGCCGTATTCCGGTCGG-3«) incorporating a
BamHI restriction site, and a reverse primer (5«-GGGTCG-ACGTCAGCTCCAGGAGCCAGTCTG-3«) incorporating a
SalI restriction site.
The PCR product was inserted into the pCR22.1 vector for
sequence veri®cation. For protein expression purposes, the
product was excised from pCR22.1 with BamHI andSalI
restriction enzymes, and cloned into the bacterial expression
vector ptac
85.
Expression and purification of recombinant human PPAT/DPCK
E.coliBL21(DE3) cells, containingptac85}ppat}dpck, were grown
at 37°Cin4¬1 litre of Luria±Bertani broth containing 50lg}ml
ampicillin. At a cell density (D
'!!
) of 0.6±0.8, isopropyl
b-d-thiogalactoside (`IPTG') was added to a ®nal concentration
of 1 mM, and growth was allowed to continue at 37°C for a
further 4 h. Cells were harvested, resuspended in 10 mM Tris}
HCl buffer, pH 8.0, containing 0.5 mM DTT and 0.5 mM
PMSF, sonicated and centrifuged at 45000gfor 20 min. Puri-®cation was performed using separation techniques similar to
those used for the wild-type pig enzyme [12]. Brie¯y, follow-ing 30±50%ammonium sulphate fractionation, ion-exchange
chromatography on Q-Sepharose was performed. The enzyme
was eluted in a 0±0.6 M linear KCl gradient in 10 mM Tris}HCl
buffer, pH 8.0, containing 0.5 mM DTT, and activity-containing
fractions were applied to a Procion Red HE-3B Sepharose
column, which was developed with a 0±0.6 M KCl gradient in
50 mM Tris}HCl, pH 8.0}0.5 mM DTT. Following sample
concentration, a ®nal FPLC Superdex 200 HR 10}30 size
exclusion stepwas carried out, as described above. PPAT}DPCK
was stored in 0.1 mM CoA at®20°C. Before use, CoA was
removed from aliquots by Sephadex G-25 (®ne) chromato-graphy.
RESULTS
PPAT and DPCK activities were co-puri®ed from pig-liver
cytosol as a single protein, as reported previously [12]. Size-exclusion chromatography on FPLC Superdex 200 at the ®nal
Figure 1 Elution profile from FPLC Superdex 200 HR 10/30 size-exclusion
chromatography of the pig-liver PPAT/DPCK (a), and N-terminal sequence
analysis of pig-liver PPAT/DPCK enzyme fragments (b)
(a) The peak eluted at 62 kDa, as determined by column calibration with known molecular-mass
markers, and contained both PPAT and DPCK activities. The inset shows an SDS/polyacrylamide
gel of the peak fraction showing a single 62 kDa band. (b) N-terminal sequence analysis of
pig-liver PPAT/DPCK fragments was performed following either limited proteolysis by trypsin
or complete cyanogen bromide cleavage. `X', unidenti®ed amino acid residue.
#2002 Biochemical Society
15 Mammalian phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase and dephospho-CoA kinase
Figure 2 Alignment of the bifunctional PPAT/DPCK sequences fromHomo sapiens(GenBank2accession no. AY094602),Sus scrofa(AY094603), Mus
musculus (gi:12836393) andDrosophila melanogaster(gi:10728128)
Similar residues are shown on a grey-shaded background ; identical residues are shown in reversed-out lettering on a black background. The peptide sequences obtained following CNBr treatment
of the pig enzyme (Figure 1b) correspond to the following positions : peptide 1, amino acids (aa) 296±315 ; peptide 2, aa 519±536 ; peptide 3, aa 482±500 ;peptide 4, aa 46±64 ; peptide 5, aa
160±177 ; and peptide 6, aa 370±355. The site for trypsin nicking of the pig enzyme is indicated by an arrow. The HXXH motif characteristic of nucleotidyl transferases and the Walker A-type
motif common to kinases are underlined. Dros,Drosophila.
stage of puri®cation revealed that, in the presence of 150 mM
NaCl, pig-liver PPAT}DPCK eluted as a peak with molecular
mass of 62 kDa (Figure 1a). This indicates that the protein
behaves as a monomer, and not a homodimer, as originally
suggested [13]. N-terminal sequence analysis of the puri®ed
protein revealed a blocked N-terminus, and internal sequencing
was performed following either limited trypsin proteolysis or
cyanogen bromide cleavage (Figure 1b). The sequences obtained
were used for gene database BLAST search analysis [18].
Hits were obtained with a number of pig expressed sequence
tag (EST) sequences (gi :6842495, gi :8274195, gi :14305703,
gi :13660202, gi :13659612 and gi :11076507). The results
allowed the corresponding cDNA to be assembled from the pig
EST sequences, and subsequently in a number of other species.
ClustalW alignment [19] of the pig, human and mouse sequences
are shown in Figure 2, and are highly conserved, with greater
than 96%sequence identity. The Drosophilasequence has
approx. 35%identity with the mammalian sequences.
The humanppat}dpckgene is located on chromosome 17q12-21, consists of 10 exons, and incorporates a coding region
designated previously as a hypothetical nucleotide-binding pro-tein (gi :894177). However, the correct ATG start codon is
#2002 Biochemical Society
16 S. Aghajanian and D. M. Worrall
Figure 3 Bioinformatic determination of functional domains of human PPAT/DPCK
(a) Gene structure and localization on chromosome 17q12-21, with predicted protein domains below. (b) Sequence alignment between the N-terminal domain (Hs-N; amino acids 1±199) and the
C-terminal domain (Hs-C; amino acids 357±564) of human PPAT/DPCK and theE. coliDPCK (Ec DPCK) sequence [7]. (c) Alignment of the middle region of PPAT/DPCK (amino acids 200±356)
with theE. coliPPAT (Ec PPAT) sequence [6]. In (b) and (c), similar residues are shown on a grey-shaded background ; identical residues are shown in reversed-out lettering on a black background.
Conserved residues also identi®ed as invariant active site residues in prokaryotes [11] are indicated with asterisks in (c).
#2002 Biochemical Society
17 Mammalian phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase and dephospho-CoA kinase
Table 1 Kinetic characteristics of the human recombinant and the pig-liver wild-type enzymes
Enzyme assays were carried out at 25°C in 50 mM Tris/HCl buffer, pH 8.0, containing 0.5 mM DTT. TheK
m
values for dPCoA in both the PPAT (reverse) and DPCK reactions were measured
at a constant concentration of PP
i
(2 mM) and ATP (1 mM), respectively. The K
m
values for both PP
i
and ATP were obtained at a constant concentration of dPCoA (0.1 mM). Data shown
in parentheses are for the wild-type pig liver enzyme.
Substrate
PPAT (reverse reaction) DPCK
K
m
(lM) V
max
(units/mg) K
m
(lM) V
max
(units/mg)
dPCoA 14.7³1.2 (11.1³2.2) 7.75³0.15 (8.13³0.86) 5.2³1.5 (4.1³1.4) 5.11³0.15 (4.37³0.61)
PP
i
272³65 (190³40) 7.5³0.3 ± ±
ATP ± ± 192³14 (330³100) 5.18³0.04
upstream from this region, and the ®nal transcribed coding
region is 1692 bp, giving rise to a 564-amino-acid polypeptide
chain (Figure 3a).
Human EST data from different tissues reveal that the gene is
widely expressed, with cDNA sequence sources including pla-centa, fetal liver, spleen, ovary, stomach, kidney, bone marrow,
testis, ®broblast, retina, salivary gland, brain, colon, lung, adrenal
gland, heart, B cells, NT2 neuronal precursor cells, uterus and
prostate. At least 294 current human EST sequences can now be
annotated as PPAT}DPCK, in addition tomany sequences from
other species.
The C-terminal 208-amino-acid region of the gene is similar to
that of the E. coliDPCK, with 24%identity (Figure 3b). This
was noted previously following sequencing of thecoaEgene [7],
but the particular alignment shown had used a human sequence
that was partially out of frame. Interestingly, there is also
internal homology within the human protein sequence, with an
N-terminal region aligning with the C-terminal one (Figure 3b).
A central domain of 157 amino acids shows weak sequence
similarity (18%identity) with the bacterial PPAT (Figure 3c),
although theE.coli coaDgene has not been reported to have any
mammalian counterparts. This PPAT region contains the His-Xaa-Xaa-His motif (where `Xaa' represents `any amino acid')
found in the nucleotidyl transferase superfamily, which is thought
to be involved in phosphodiester cleavage [20]. The DPCK C-terminal region contains a conserved Walker A-type kinase motif
(GISGSGKS) involved in ATP binding [21].
Proteolytic nicking of the pig enzyme by trypsin to yield
40 kDa and 22 kDa fragments has been reported, which does not
effect either activity or the proposed tertiary structure [13]. The
sequence analysis of the resulting 40 kDa band resulting from
SDS}PAGE (the 22 kDa band N-terminal was blocked) shows
that this nicking occurs after position Arg")", suggesting that an
exposed region exists between the N-terminal region and the
PPAT domain.
The human PPAT}DPCK cDNA was cloned from HepG2
cells and the sequence was veri®ed (submitted to GenBank2;
accession number AY094602). Expression and puri®cation of the
recombinant human protein was performed, and activity assays
con®rmed that the human gene encodes the bifunctional enzyme
PPAT}DPCK. Size-exclusion chromatography on an FPLC
Superdex 200 column showed that the human recombinant
protein behaved like the pig-liver wild-type enzyme, eluting as a
single peak of 62 kDa, suggesting a monomeric native structure
(the predicted molecular mass from the open reading frame is
62329 Da).
Analysis of kinetic parameters of the human recombinant
enzyme and the pig-liver wild-type enzyme was performed for the
PPAT (reverse) reaction and for the DPCK reaction. The results
of kinetic analysis are shown in Table 1 (parameters for the pig-liver wild-type enzyme are given in parentheses), and indicate
that the kinetic properties of the human recombinant PPAT}
DPCK are very similar to those of the pig enzyme, as was
anticipated from the high level of sequence similarity.
DISCUSSION
Current knowledge of the CoA biosynthetic enzymes in higher
organisms has not kept pace with the identi®cation and charac-terization of the corresponding genes in bacteria. Previous
biochemical evidence suggested that the mammalian PPAT and
DPCK enzymes exist as a bifunctional enzyme [12,22], where
monofunctional counterparts are found in bacteria. We have
now identi®ed the gene encoding the bifunctional enzyme, and
have veri®ed the activities to be associated with the 564-amino-acid recombinant human protein.
There is no evidence for any CoA transport system in multi-cellular organisms, and it is assumed that each cell has the ability
to generate an independent pool of CoA using the biosynthetic
pathway. This is borne out by the fact that the expressed
sequence for the bifunctional PPAT}DPCK is found in a wide
range of tissues, and annotation of this gene will now aid in the
designationof a large number of previously `unknown' sequences
in all higher organisms.
It is possible that monofunctional enzymes may also exist in
higher organisms, particularly in view of mitochondrial subfrac-tionation studies,which suggest differences inactivitydistribution
between PPAT and DPCK [23]. However, no other genes were
identi®ed onBLASTanalysis of the human genome in the present
study.
Following alignment analysis with the known monofunctional
E.colisequences, the protein can be essentially divided into three
potential domains. The C-terminal domain shows signi®cant
sequence similarity to theE. coli coaEgene, and is predicted to
contain the DPCK activity. The N-terminal and C-terminal
domains demonstrate some intramolecular sequence similarity
(18%identity), suggesting that a gene-duplication event followed
by a gene-fusion event may have occurred to give rise to part of
the bifunctional enzyme. There is also sequence similarity (albeit
weaker) between the 159-amino-acidE. coliPPAT protein and
the central region (amino acids 200±356) of the human PPAT}
DPCKenzyme.Within prokaryotic PPAT sequences, 14 residues
have been identi®ed as invariant [11], and the crystal structure
demonstrated that a number of these are involved in dPCoA
binding. UsingE. coliPPAT numbering, eight of these residues
(Phe"", His"), Lys%#, Arg)), Gly)*, Phe*', Glu** and Ser"#*) are
also conserved in the human sequence (Figure 3c). It is likely that
this region of the human protein forms a Rossmann fold, similar
to the bacterial PPAT and to class 1 aminoacyl-tRNA synthe-tases.
#2002 Biochemical Society
18 S. Aghajanian and D. M. Worrall
Acrystal structure of themonofunctional DPCKfromHaemo-philus in¯uenzaehas recently been obtained [24], which included
an ATP-binding P-loop and a CoA-binding site at the interface
of three domains. It is also likely that the comparable C-terminal
domain of the bifunctional enzyme adopts a similar structure. It
is more difficult to predict the overall structure, which may show
internal dimerization between the similar N- and C-terminal
regions. Crystallization studies, currently in progress, may also
shed light on the total number of ATP- and dPCoA-binding
sites, and the possibility of dPCoA channelling between the two
activities.