Abstract
Riboflavin kinase (RFK) is an essential enzyme catalyzing the phosphorylation of riboflavin (vitamin B2) to form FMN, an obligatory step in vitamin B2 utilization and flavin cofactor synthesis. The structure of human RFK revealed a six-stranded antiparallel ß barrel core structurally similar to the riboflavin synthase/ferredoxin reductase FAD binding domain fold. The binding site of an intrinsically bound MgADP defines a novel nucleotide binding motif that encompasses a loop, a 310 helix, and a reverse turn followed by a short ß strand. This active site loop forms an arch with ATP and riboflavin binding at the opposite side and the phosphoryl transfer appears to occur through the hole underneath the arch. The invariant residues Asn36 and Glu86 are implicated in the catalysis.

Keywords
crystal structure; riboflavin kinase; flavocoenzyme biosynthesis; nucleotide binding; phosphoryl transfer; ß barrel
Introduction
Riboflavin nucleotide coenzymes, flavin mononucleotide (FMN), and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) are essential cofactors for a large number of flavoproteins that carry out a great diversity of redox reactions. The flavoenzymes participate in a wide range of biological processes, including carbohydrate, amino acid, and fatty acid metabolisms. Many bacteria are able to synthesize riboflavin de novo. However, in animal and human, the only source for FAD and FMN comes from the exogenous riboflavin (vitamin B2). The first step in human flavocoenzyme biosynthesis is the phosphorylation of riboflavin to form FMN, a reaction catalyzed by riboflavin kinase (RFK, ATP: riboflavin 5'-phosphotransferase, EC 2.7.1.26). A substantial portion of FMN is further transformed by FAD synthetase (FADS, ATP: FMN adenylyltransferase, EC. 2.7.7.2) to FAD, which contributes the majority of total flavins in most tissues. In bacteria, riboflavin kinase and FAD synthetase activities are presented in a single bifunctional riboflavin kinase/FAD synthetase enzyme, the ~38 kDa protein product of gene ribF (or ribC designated in B. sublitis) 1 and 2. In contrast, yeast and other eukaryotic riboflavin kinases are encoded in an 18.5–24 kDa monofunctional protein 3, 4 and 5. The riboflavin kinase from S. cervisiae, the fmn1 gene product, has recently been characterized [5]. As the last obligatory steps in flavocoenyzme synthesis, ribF/ribC and yeast fmn1, have been shown to be essential for the growth of E. coli, B. sublitis, and S. cervisiae, respectively 2, 5 and 6. Sequence analysis shows that close homologs of yeast FMN1 in other eukaryotes, including human, may also code for monofunctional riboflavin kinases. Riboflavin kinase purified from mammalian tissues (rat liver and intestine) has been subjected to extensive investigations regarding their kinetic properties, substrate induction, and thyroid hormone stimulation 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11. It was shown that rat RFK responds to thyroid hormone regulation and is also important for vitamin B2 absorption 4 and 11. Kinetic studies of RFKs from both eukaryotes and prokaryotes revealed that they have an ordered bi bi mechanism, with riboflavin preferably binding first to the enzyme 7 and 12. In spite of these early studies, characterization of mammalian RFK genes and overexpression of the recombinant proteins have not been reported until very recently [6].

In order to understand the mechanisms of the function of this essential enzyme in human, we have cloned, overexpressed, and purified an 18.5 kDa human homolog of yeast FMN1 (gi|19923525). The protein was copurified with bound FMN molecule, and its flavokinase activity has been confirmed (F.M. and A.L.O., unpublished data). We have now solved the crystal structures of human RFK complexed with MgADP and of the ternary complex of human RFK with both riboflavin nucleotide and ADP. These structures revealed a six-stranded antiparallel ß barrel fold core and a novel nucleotide binding motif that contains a loop, a 310 helix, and a reverse turn leading to a short ß strand that contains the most conserved PTAN sequence.

Results and Discussion
Structure Determination
The recombinant human RFK was coexpressed with bound product FMN in E. coli, as confirmed by the HPLC assay (F.M. and A.L.O., unpublished data). During the purification, the bound FMN was separated from the enzyme, and crystals were grown in the FMN-free form. Both FMN-bound and FMN-free RFK were shown to be monomers by size exclusion chromatography. The structure of human riboflavin kinase (hsRFK) was solved by the MAD phasing methods using the anomalous scattering at Se edge and the model was refined to 1.7 Å resolution. Surprisingly, the structure analysis revealed a clear electron density for an ADP molecule and a Mg2+ ion (MgADP). Apparently, both products of the enzyme, FMN and ADP, were trapped in the RFK active site when the protein was overexpressed in E. coli. The hydrophobic interaction chromatography separated FMN from hsRFK, but MgADP remained bound. The ternary complex crystals were obtained by soaking the flavin-free crystals with respective flavin ligands (riboflavin or FMN). All three complex structures (hsRFK + MgADP, hsRFK + MgADP + riboflavin, and hsRFK + MgADP + FMN) were refined to convergence and the refinement statistics are listed in Table 1. Comparison of all three hsRFK complexes showed that their structures are nearly identical (rmsd between Ca's range 0.15–0.2 Å).

Table 1.
Refinement Statistics of hsRFK Complexes
Complexes	MgADP	MgADP + RBF	MgADP + FMN
Resolution (Å)	50–1.7	50–1.7	50–1.8
Rcryst (%)1	18.7 (21.4)3	18.4 (30.1)3	18.6 (35.3)4
Rfree (%)2	22.0 (24.3)	20.6 (31.9)	23.2 (37.2)
r.m.s. deviation in bond lengths (Å)	0.015	0.016	0.016
r.m.s. deviation in bond angles (°)	1.61	1.72	1.59
No. of protein atoms	1192	1203	1186
No. of hetero atoms	28	55	59
No. of solvent atoms	130	118	108
Average B Factor (Å2)			
Protein atoms	12.9	19.1	20.0
Ligand atoms	19.0	22.2	36.2
Ramachandran Statistics (%)			
Most favored region	95.2	92.0	92.8
Additionally allowed region	4.0	7.2	6.4
Generously allowed region	0.8	0.8	0.8
1
Rcryst = S||Fobs| - k|Fcalc||/S|Fobs|, where Fobs and Fcalc are the observed and calculated structure factors, respectively.
2
Rfree is calculated as Rcryst using 5% of the reflection data chosen randomly and omitted from the refinement calculations.
3
Outer resolution shell (1.74–1.70 Å).
4
Outer resolution shell (1.85–1.80 Å).
Table options
Structure Description
The overall structure of human RFK contains a six-stranded ß barrel core with Greek key topology (Figure 1). A short 310 helix is located in the loop connecting strand a and b, and an a helix (helix A) is located between strand b and c. Additional a-helical segments (helices B, C, and D) are located at the C-terminal region. Helices B and C are connected by a loop and are nearly perpendicular to each other. These last stretch of helices wrap around the ß barrel. A DALI search [13] for similar structures found that the fold of RFK is similar to several flavoproteins in “riboflavin synthetase domain-like” superfamily (as classified in SCOP [14]), which also includes the FAD binding domains in ferredoxin reductase and NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase protein families. This superfamily is sometimes also referred to as the “ferredoxin reductase superfamily (FAD binding domain).” The top DALI hits are benzoate 1,2-diosygenase reductase (Protein Data Bank [pdb] code 1krh, Z-score 3.9, rmsd 3.5 Å over 96 Ca atoms, sequence identity 7%), phthalate dioxygenase reductase (2pia, Z-score 3.6, rmsd 3.8 Å over 97 Ca atoms, identity 14%), ferredoxin:NADP+ oxidoreductase (1fnc, Z-score 3.2, rmsd 3.6 Å over 97 Ca atoms, identity 6%), and riboflavin synthetase a chain fragment (1il8, Z-score 2.6, rmsd 3.4 Å over 71 Ca atoms, identity 13%).

Full-size image (127 K)
Figure 1. 
The Overall Structure of hsRFK
(A) Stereo view of ribbon diagram of human riboflavin kinase (hsRFK). Strands are labeled a–f, and a helices are labeled A–D. The two MgATP binding loops are labeled L1 and L2, respectively. The bound ligands MgADP and riboflavin (RBF) are shown as stick models. The Fo - Fc omit map is contoured at 2.0s and shown for the two ligands.
(B) Stereo Ca trace of hsRFK with every tenth residue labeled. The ADP and riboflavin molecules are shown as bonds and Mg2+ ion as a ball. This figure and Figures 2 and 3 are made using Molscript [31].
Figure options
A close inspection of RFK and the ferredoxin reductase superfamily flavoproteins revealed that they share the same Greek key six-stranded ß barrel topology (Figure 2). However, the details of spatial arrangement of strands and the location of the flavin ligand binding site are different. For example, strands a and b of the ferredoxin reductase superfamily proteins form a tight ß hairpin, while in RFK there is a long loop connecting strand a and b and the strand b is very short and nearly perpendicular to strand a. Another important difference is in the relative positioning of strands d and e. In ferredoxin reductase superfamily proteins, there is a big gap between strands d and e and the flavocoenzymes (FMN or FAD) is bound to the cleft between these two strands. There is also an a helix connecting strands e and f that caps the ß barrel, and its N terminus is involved in the interaction with the phosphate group(s) of FMN or FAD. In contrast, strands d and e in hsRFK form a tight ß hairpin and no capping helix is seen between strand e and f (Figure 2). As will be discussed in more details later, the riboflavin in the RFK ternary complex binds in a pocket formed between the surface of strands c, d, e, and the helix C.

Full-size image (65 K)
Figure 2. 
Fold Comparison of Riboflavin Kinase with Two Other ß Barrel Flavin Binding Folds
The last two helices (helices C and D) in hsRFK are omitted for clarity. The bound ligand(s) in each structure is shown in the ball-and-stick representation. The N and C termini and each ß strand are labeled. ß strands in ferric reductase are labeled in a circular permutated fashion according to the topology of phthalate dioxygenase reductase N-terminal domain.
Figure options
Interestingly, an evolutionary relationship has been proposed between ferredoxin reductase superfamily and the “FMN binding split barrel” fold proteins [15], even though the topology of the two superfamilies are different and can only be related by a circular permutation (Figure 2). The later fold includes ferric reductase [16], FMN binding protein MTH152 [17], pyridoxine 5'-phoshate oxidase [17], as well as the FMN binding protein from Desulfovibrio vulgaris, strain Miyazaki F [16]. The similar spatial arrangement of the ß strands in the barrel and especially the common topological location and characteristics of the flavin cofactor binding site argue for a possible common evolutionary origin of these two protein superfamilies [15]. Riboflavin kinase, on the other hand, shares the same topological connections with riboflavin synthetase and is in the same pathway immediately downstream from riboflavin synthetase. However, so far we cannot find convincing evidence to support homology between these two structurally related enzymes in the same metabolic pathway.

The MgADP Binding Site
The extra electron density that emerged at the early refinement stage clearly resembles an ADP molecule and a Mg2+ ion coordinated to both a and ß phosphate oxygens. The low B factors of the bound MgADP (14.6 Å2) indicate that this product binds to the enzyme very tightly (Table 1), which may explain why MgADP did not release from the enzyme after multistep purification procedures.

The ADP molecule is nested at the one end of the ß barrel, between two crossover loops (Figure 3A): one connects strands a and b and contains a short 310 helix (termed Loop 1 or L1, residues 20–34), and the other connects strands e and f (termed Loop 2 or L2, residues 90–99). The detailed interactions between MgADP and the enzyme are shown in Figure 3A. Specifically, the N6 of adenine is hydrogen bonded to the main chain carbonyl groups of Ile89 and His91; N1 interacts with the main chain amide of Ile89, and N7 interacts with a water molecule, which in turn interacts with Phe93 main chain amide (Figure 3A). The positioning of the adenine ring is restricted by the side chains of Pro33 from L1 and Phe97 from L2, which are situated at the opposite side of the adenine ring and form favorable van der Waals interactions with the adenine ribose (distances 3.4–3.5 Å). A salt bridge, formed between the side chains of Asp96 from L2 and Lys28 from L1, appears to sequester the adenine ribose portion of the bound ADP molecule (Figure 3A).

Full-size image (112 K)
Figure 3. 
Stereo View of the Substrate Binding and Active Site of hsRFK
(A) Stereo view of the MgADP binding site.
(B) Stereo view of the riboflavin/FMN binding site. The bound ligands and relevent protein residues are shown in the ball-and-stick representation. The hydrogen bonds and Mg2+ ion coordination are indicated by dashed lines. The two MgATP binding loops are labeled L1 and L2, respectively.
Figure options
The a and ß phosphates of ADP and the Mg2+ ion primarily interact with loop L1 and strand b. The sequences of this region are highly conserved in the RFK family (Figure 4). The most conserved motif, 33PTAN36, adopts a ß strand conformation (strand b), while sequence 27SKQL30 adopts the 310 helix conformation and is connected to the strand b through a reverse turn. The a phosphate of ADP is located near the N-terminal end of the 310 helix and interacts with the main chain amide groups of Lys28 and Thr34. The ADP ß phosphate interacts with Gly22 main chain amide, Asn36 side chain amino group, and the hydroxyl group of Tyr98 (Figure 3A). Oxygens from both a and ß phosphate are coordinated to the Mg2+ ion. Additional Mg2+ ligands are contributed by Thr34 side chain hydroxyl, Thr34 main chain carbonyl, and two water molecules. The Mg2+ ligand distances range from 2.01 to 2.15 Å. The coordination of the six Mg2+ ligands forms a nearly perfect octahedral geometry (Figure 3A). Strikingly, the L1 loop and the 310 helix are mostly exposed to the solvent, and the ADP phosphate tail and Mg2+ bind under an arch formed by this loop. Such nucleotide binding mode appears to be completely novel and is not similar to any other nucleotide binding motifs in any kinases or NTP hydrolases [18].

Full-size image (165 K)
Figure 4. 
Multiple Sequence Alignment of Representative Sequences of Riboflavin Kinases
Diagram of the secondary structure elements for hsRFK (gi|19923525) are shown at the top. Each sequence is identified by the SWISS-PROT entry name or, in the absence of a SWISS-PROT annotation, by the NCBI gene identification number (gi) followed by abbreviation of the species name. The first and the last residue numbers of the sequences in the alignment are indicated, and the total length of the protein is shown at the end. The number of omitted residues in the alignment is shown in parentheses. The locations of the MgADP binding Loop 1 and Loop 2 are marked. The invariant residues are highlighted in black and are shown in white letters. Uncharged residues in mainly hydrophobic sites are highlighted in yellow. Conserved small residues are highlighted in gray. Residues that are involved in substrate binding are colored red for flavin binding and blue for ADP/ATP binding. Additionally, the letters at the bottom of the alignment also indicate the roles of the residues, with A for ATP/ADP binding, F for flavin binding, and M for Mg2+ binding. The species name abbreviations are as follows: Hs, Homo sapiens; Dm, Drosophila melanogaster; At, Arabidopsis thaliana; Dd, Dictyostelium discoideum; Sc, Saccharomyces cerevisiae; Sp, Schizosaccharomyces pombe; Ce, Caenorhabditis elegans; Hp, Helicobacter pylori; Ssp, Synechocystis sp.; Dr, Deinococcus radiodurans; Ec, Escherichia coli; Aa, Aquifex aeolicus.
Figure options
Kinetic studies of several eukaryotic and bacterial RFKs have shown that Zn2+ ion activates the enzyme more strongly than Mg2+1, 3 and 8. The crystal structures of hsRFK reported here are obtained from crystals grown in the presence of 0.2 M Mg acetate. Therefore, we refine the ion as Mg2+ and the resulted B factor (14.5 Å2) of this ion is comparable with that of the surrounding atoms. The anomalous difference Fourier map calculated from data collected at synchrotron at wavelength 1 Å, which is above Zn absorption edge (1.2837 Å), did not show any significant peak at the Mg2+ position. This also supports that Zn2+ is not present in the current crystal structure. Notably, the current Mg2+ ligand interaction distances and octahedral geometry are also suitable for binding of a Zn2+ ion [19]. However, one may argue that Mg2+ is more likely to be the physiological relevant coactivator for RFK, since Mg2+ concentration in vivo is much higher than that of Zn2+.

The Riboflavin/FMN Binding Site
The RFK-riboflavin ternary complex was achieved by soaking the flavin-free crystals with riboflavin. The difference electron density map clearly showed the presence of the riboflavin molecule. The isoalloxazine ring of the riboflavin is bound in a deep pocket between part of the outer surface of the ß barrel (formed by strand c, d, and e) and a long a helix B, while the ribityl tail extends toward strand b and the MgADP binding site (Figure 3B). The hydrophobic dimethylbenzene edge sits at the bottom of this pocket and is surrounded by the hydrophobic residues Ile53, Val69, Phe116, Leu122, and Ile126. The 2,4-pyrimidindione (uracil) moiety of the isoalloxazine ring points toward the opening of the pocket. Several specific hydrogen bonds are formed between protein and specific groups of this portion of the isoalloxazine ring (Figure 3B). In particular, the side chain of Arg111 forms bifurcated hydrogen bonds with the N5 and O4 groups on the isoalloxazine ring. This Arg is salt bridged with Asp129 side chain in a “side-on” doubly hydrogen-bonded configuration, which is one of the most energetically favorable conformations for an Asp-Arg interaction [20]. This salt bridge appears to stabilize the Arg111 side chain in a position optimal for the interaction with the N5 and O4 groups on the isoalloxazine ring. Additionally, the N3 and O4 groups on 2,4-pyrimidindione (uracil) moiety are hydrogen bonded with the main chain carbonyl and amide, respectively, of residue Lys114, and the O2 hydroxyl interacts with Phe116 main chain amide through a water molecule. These specific hydrogen bonding interactions appear to be crucial in correctly orienting the bound flavin substrate. Modifications of arginyl and lysyl residues of rat liver RFK suggested that one Arg residue is involved in substrate binding while the involvement of the lysyl residue in substrate binding or catalysis is less critical [9]. These earlier results are consistent with the observation in the crystal structures. All the above mentioned residues that interact with riboflavin are highly conserved throughout RFK family (Figure 4), indicating that such flavin binding mode should be conserved in RFKs from other organisms as well.

In contrast to the extensive interactions between isoalloxazine ring and protein atoms, few interactions are observed that could anchor the ribityl tail of RBF. In the current structure, the B factors for the ribityl tail atom are much higher than that of the isoalloxazine ring and its density is poorly defined. Our attempt to obtain FMN complex by soaking resulted in the melting of the flavin-free crystals when the soaking time was longer than 2 hr. A data set collected from a crystal soaked with FMN for 45 min clearly revealed density for a bound FMN, although the B factors for the FMN atoms are high suggesting partial occupancies (Table 1). The conformation of this bound FMN molecule is essentially the same as that of the bound riboflavin, and the ribityl phosphate tail is also flexible. Nevertheless, a stronger density close to the Mg2+ ion emerged that could be attributed to the phosphate of FMN. This phosphate group substituted one of the water ligands for Mg2+ in the FMN-free structure (compare Figures 3A and 3B) and may represent the conformation of the product FMN at the end of the reaction. Glu86 is found in the vicinity of the ribityl tail and is within hydrogen bonding distance to the O3' and O5' hydroxyl groups. This Glu is invariant in all RFKs, and its location suggests that it may play a critical role in correct positioning O5' for phosphoryl transfer. It is also possible that Glu86 may act as a catalytic base and is directly involved in the catalysis. Another potential catalytic residue is the invariant Asn36 of the PTAN motif, which interacts with the ß-phosphate of adenine nucleotide directly and with Mg2+ indirectly through a water molecule.

Catalytic Mechanism and Potential Conformational Changes
Steady-state kinetic analysis and evaluation of product inhibition of rat liver flavokinase suggested an ordered bi bi mechanism [7], in which riboflavin binds first, followed by ATP; then ADP is released followed by the release of FMN. A similar mechanism has also been proposed for the bacterial RFK in the RFK/FADS bifunctional enzyme from Corynrbacterium ammoniagenes [12]. In the current study, human RFK is coexpressed with the trapped products FMN and MgADP, and the structures have shown unusually tight binding of the enzyme with the product MgADP. These observations were initially puzzling and raised question as how the products are released from the enzyme. The product-loaded hsRFK is shown to be fully functional (F.M. and A.L.O., unpublished data). The specific activity of human RFK (>9240 units mg-1) compares well with the reported value for rat RFK (9900 units mg-1) 3 and 4. Earlier studies have also shown that rat liver RFK activity can be stimulated by elevated riboflavin level [10], and the cellular RFK pool contains two fractions of RFK: one with higher activity and the other with lower activity [11]. Our current structure clearly represents one of the product bound conformations, namely the MgADP-bound form. According to the kinetic data, the ADP bound enzyme is less active, probably because the ADP preloaded enzyme adopts such a conformation that it could not provide sufficient interactions to anchor the ribityl tail of the riboflavin substrate for efficient phosphoryl transfer. It appears that optimal binding of the riboflavin substrate may require certain conformational changes near enzyme active site. However, inspection of crystal packing revealed that the active site loop L1 is involved in the interlattice packing and interacts extensively with two adjacent symmetry related RFK molecules. These interactions would restrict potential riboflavin/FMN binding induced conformational changes in the current crystal lattice.

Taken together the results from earlier enzymological studies and the current structural data, we hypothesize that the hsRFK may be activated by the presence of high concentration of substrate, especially riboflavin. The unique active site configurations of RFK provide further insights into the possible regulatory mechanism of the enzyme. One may speculate that human RFK normally exits as the product-loaded form. One advantage of an occupied RFK active site is that the conformation of the critical Loop 1 is stabilized by the ligand binding. This loop may otherwise be flexible or disordered without a bound ligand, and it would be energetically costly to restore its “active” conformation. In this scenario, the activity of RFK would be largely regulated by the relative concentrations of substrates/products in the cell and/or by the specific interactions with other regulators. Additional structural, mutational, and kinetic studies will be required to further characterize the catalytic mechanism and potential ligand binding induced conformational changes of the enzyme.

Biological Implications
RFK is a ubiquitous enzyme catalyzing the phosphorylation of riboflavin (vitamin B2) to form FMN, an obligatory step in vitamin B2 utilization and flavin cofactor synthesis. The structure of human riboflavin kinase revealed a unique architecture and active site configurations of this essential enzyme family. A recent survey of over 10,000 kinases [18] found that most kinases (97%) fall into a few known fold groups, such as protein kinase fold, Rossmann-like fold, ferredoxin-like fold, ribonuclease H-like fold (or ASKHA superfamily), and GHMP fold. All these fold groups belongs to either a/ß or a + ß classes. Many of these kinases utilize a glycine-rich phosphate binding loop and the positive dipole of an a helix for nucleotide binding [18]. RFK structure described here is the first example of the largest remaining kinase families with unknown structure. The six-stranded Greek key ß barrel fold presents a unique kinase fold. Most strikingly, RFK uses a unique structural motif for nucleotide binding. This motif contains the most conserved PTAN sequence and is composed of a loop and a 310 helix connected to a short ß strand via a reverse turn. The nucleotide binding and phosphoryl transfer reaction apparently occurs beneath the arch formed by the loop of this motif. To the best of our knowledge, such active site arrangement has not been observed in any other kinases or nucleotide hydrolysases. Although its fold bears similarity to the “riboflavin synthetase domain-like” fold in SCOP [14], inspection of the structure details and active site residue arrangement do not support a divergent evolutionary relationship despite the fact that riboflavin synthetase and RFK catalyze two consecutive steps in the same biosynthesis pathway. The ternary structure of human RFK complexed with both riboflavin and ADP sheds light on the structural mechanism of substrate recognition and revealed potential catalytic residues. It also provides a platform for the future investigations of the regulatory mechanisms of flavocoenzyme homeostasis in human.

Experimental Procedures
Protein Expression, Purification, and Crystallization
The gene encoding human riboflavin kinase (gi|19923525) was amplified from a human brain cDNA library (CLONTECH) by polymerase chain reaction and cloned into a pPROEX-Hta (GIBCO–BRL) vector containing Trc promoter, lacIq repressor, 6xHis tag, and TEV-protease cleavage site. The plasmid was transformed into the E. coli strain BL21 (Novagen) for the expression. The overexpressed protein was first purified with a Ni2+-nitrilotriacetic-agarose (Qiagen) column, followed by the TEV protease treatment to cleave the 6xHis tag in a dialysis bag overnight at 4°C. The protein was then passed through Ni-NTA column again, followed by a final phenyl sepharose chromatography purification step. The selenomethionine hsRFK was expressed in a met- auxotrophic strain B834 grown in minimum media supplemented with selenomethionine and other nutrients [21] and purified by the same procedures as the native protein.

The hsRFK crystals were grown at 20°C by the hanging drop vapor diffusion method. hsRFK (15–17 mg/ml, in buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol, pH 7.2–7.4) was mixed with the same amount of the reservoir solution that contains 100 mM Na cacodylate, pH 6.5, 200 mM Mg acetate, 23% PEG8000, and equilibrated against the reservoir. Large crystals appeared from the precipitate after 5–6 days. The crystals of hsRFK complexed with substrate riboflavin were obtained by soaking the flavin-free crystals with 1.25 mM vitamin B2 (Sigma) for 24 hr. The crystals of hsRFK complexed with FMN were obtained the same way except that the soaking time was 45 min.

Data Collection and Processing
For synchrotron data collection at 100 K, the crystals were transferred stepwise to a cryoprotection solution containing all components of the reservoir and additional 30% glycerol, flash cooled, and stored in liquid propane before data collection. Data was collected on native and selenomethionine (Se-Met) crystals of hsRFK using synchrotron radiation at beamline 19BM, Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory. Complete data sets corresponding to peak, inflection, and a high-energy remote wavelengths of Se edge were collected to 2.0 Å resolution on a selenomethoinine crystal, while data to 1.68 Å resolution for the native crystal was collected using the radiation of wavelength 1.0080 Å. All diffraction images were processed and scaled using HKL2000 package [22]. The crystals belong to space group P3121 as determined later, with unit cell dimensions View the MathML source, View the MathML source, and contain one hsRFK molecule per asymmetric unit. The calculated Matthews' coefficient VM is 2.11 Å3 Da-1, corresponding to 41.8% (v/v) solvent content.

For the riboflavin- and FMN-soaked crystals, data was collected on an R-AXIS IV imaging-plate area detector with CuKa radiation focused through mirror optics (Osmic). X-rays were from an RU-H3R rotation anode generator. Both crystals diffracted to 1.80 Å, and complete data sets were collected from a single crystal frozen at 100 K. The data was indexed, integrated, and scaled using the programs DENZO and SCALEPACK as implemented in the HKL package version 1.96 [22]. The data collection statistics for all crystals are listed in Table 2.

Table 2.
Data Collection Statistics
SeMet hsRFK
Peak	Inflection	Remote	MgADP Complex	MgADP + RBF Complex	MgADP + FMN Complex
Wavelength (Å)	0.97940	0.97956	0.96417	1.0080	1.5418	1.5418
Resolution (Å)	50.0–2.0	50.0–2.0	50.0–2.0	50.0–1.7	50.0–1.7	50.0–1.8
Total observations	162163	164880	161385	212199	251797	139047
Unique reflections	10705	10711	11232	16996	17151	14856
Completeness (outer shell)1 (%)	99.0 (96.0)	99.1 (96.2)	99.1 (96.3)	95.9 (83.2)2	97.5 (90.3)2	99.3 (95.2)3
Rsym (outer shell)4	0.034 (0.131)	0.034 (0.146)	0.035 (0.156)	0.036 (0.200)	0.030 (0.263)	0.053 (0.854)
I/s (outer shell)	42.8 (10.9)	41.2 (9.5)	40.3 (8.6)	49.2 (4.3)	63.9 (3.6)	30.7 (1.2)
FOM (after SOLVE)	0.72					
FOM (after DM upto 1.7Å)	0.75					
1
Outer shell : 2.08–2.01 resolution.
2
Outer shell : 1.76–1.70 resolution.
3
Outer shell : 1.86–1.80 resolution.
4
Rsym = S|(I - <I>)|/SI, where I is the observed integrated intensity, <I> is the average integrated intensity obtained from multiple measurements and the summation is over all observed reflections.
Table options
Structure Determination and Refinement
Three selenium atoms out of six were located by analyzing MAD data using the automated structure determination package SOLVE [23]. Because the handedness of the calculated phases was not known, assignment of the space group as P3221 or P3121 was not possible at this stage. The phases obtained from SOLVE were further improved by solvent flattening and histogram matching with a solvent content of 45%, using the program DM [24] in the CCP4 package [25]. After 11 cycles of phase extension with DM, the Rfree for space group P3121 converged from 46.1% to 35.9%, whereas the Rfree for the enantiomorphic space group P3221 changed only from 61.3% to 60.2%, indicating that the correct space group was P3121. The calculated phases were refined and extended to 1.68 Å for the native data set using DM. The final map after phase refinement and solvent flattening was of excellent quality and readily interpretable. An initial model was built automatically using the program ARP/wARP 26 and 27. In total, 985 protein atoms (out of 1185 of the final model) were built into the map with ARP/wARP. Crystallographic refinement was carried out with maximum likelihood target using the program REFMAC [28]. Five percent of the reflections were reserved throughout refinement for the calculation of the free R factor. After each cycle of refinement, manual model building was carried out using sA-weighted 2Fobs - Fcalc and Fobs - Fcalc maps, and the complete model was built into the map using the program O [29]. After manual assignment of 124 ordered water molecules, the final R and Rfree factors were 18.7% and 22.6%, respectively, for 16,996 reflections in the resolution range 50–1.68 Å. The refinement statistics are given in Table 1.

The final model of hsRFK consists of 1185 protein atoms (residues 9–155), one ADP, one Mg2+ ion, and 124 water molecules. The residues 1–8 and 156–162 were disordered and not included in the final model. The average temperature factors for all protein atoms are 12.9 Å 2.

Structures for riboflavin and FMN soaked crystals were solved by molecular replacement method using the native hsRFK model (after removing solvent and ligand molecules) and the program Molrep [30]. Both models were further refined using REFMAC [28]. In each crystal structure, the difference Fourier showed a clear electron density for riboflavin or FMN at above 3s level. Riboflavin and FMN were modeled in the electron density and further refined by adding water molecules. The final refinement statistics are shown in Table 1.