Abstract

Abstract: Mutations in the pantothenate kinase 2 gene (PANK2) lead to pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN, formerly Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome). This neurodegenerative disorder is characterized by iron accumulation in the basal ganglia. Pantothenate kinase is the first enzyme in the biosynthesis of coenzyme A from pantothenate (vitamin B5). PANK2, one of four human pantothenate kinase genes, is uniquely predicted to be targeted to mitochondria. We demonstrate mitochondrial localization of PANK2 and speculate on mechanisms of secondary iron accumulation in PKAN. Furthermore, PANK2 uses an unconventional translational start codon, CUG, which is polymorphic in the general population. The variant sequence, CAG (allele frequency: 0.05), leads to skipping of the mitochondrial targeting signal and cytosolic localization of PANK2. This common variant may cause mitochondrial dysfunction and impart susceptibility to late-onset neurodegenerative disorders with brain iron accumulation, including Parkinson's disease.

Close the feedback
You are previewing our new enhanced HTML article.
If you can't find a tool you're looking for, please click the link at the top of the page to go "Back to old version". We'll be adding more features regularly and your feedback is important to us, so please let us know if you have comments or ideas for improvement.
INTRODUCTION

Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN, formerly Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease with iron deposition in the basal ganglia, pigmentary retinopathy, and movement and speech defects.1 Recently, we demonstrated that this disease results from mutations in the gene encoding pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2) and proposed hypotheses of pathogenesis.2 This discovery has led to the previously unappreciated involvement of a well-studied metabolic pathway in neurodegeneration.

Pantothenate kinase, an essential regulatory enzyme in coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis, catalyzes the phosphorylation of pantothenate (vitamin B5), N-pantothenoyl-cysteine, and pantetheine.3 Pantothenate kinase activity in rat has been reported to be cytosolic.4,5 Although CoA is required in mitochondria, no mitochondrial activity of the first three enzymes in the CoA synthetic pathway (pantothenate kinase, p-pantothenate-cysteine synthase, and p-pantothenoyl-cysteine decarboxylase) has been found.6 The final two enzymes in this cascade (pantetheine-p-adenylyl transferase and dephospho-CoA kinase) have been associated with mitochondria, either within the matrix7 or on the cytosolic membrane face.8

Humans have four genes predicted to encode a pantothenate kinase. Three human paralogs, PANK1, PANK2, and PANK3, have six nearly identical core exons preceded by significantly divergent sequences in exon 1.2,9 A fourth human paralog, PANK4, is more similar in sequence to its counterparts in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Caenorhabditis elegans.2

Among these sequences, only PANK2 is predicted to localize to mitochondria, with a strong 29-amino-acid mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS) at the amino terminus (Predotar, http://www.inra.frpredotar; TargetP V1.0, http://www.cbs.dtu.dkservicesTargetP; and MitoProt, http://www.mips.biochem.mpg.decgi-binprojmedgenmitofilter).10,11 Mitochondrial localization of PANK2, along with its relatively abundant expression in brain,2 may help to explain the pathophysiology of PKAN.

In this study, we use an antibody against human PANK2 and an antibody against the mouse PANK2, as well as a set of myc-HIS-tagged human PANK2 constructs, to investigate subcellular localization in various cell types. We show that PANK2 is localized to mitochondria, with a small cytosolic fraction. Additionally, we demonstrate that localization is dependent on alternative translational start sites. Finally, we show that a common translation initiation variant produces predominantly cytosolic PANK2 and we propose that this may be a susceptibility allele to common neurodegenerative disorders in which brain iron accumulation has been observed.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Assembly of PANK2 cDNA

Human PANK2 cDNA, from the predicted translational start to stop codons, was assembled via a three-part ligation. Fragment 1 was generated as follows: exon 1C was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using genomic DNA and the primers 5'GTCCCCAGCCTCGTCGGATTGGCTT and 5'ACAGTGTCCGCGCGCGGGAAAAAC (GenBank accession no. AL353194, nucleotides 28180-28204 and 28699-28676, respectively). The resulting amplicon extended 88 nucleotides 5' of the predicted translational start and 104 base pairs 3' of the end of exon 1C. The final 8 nucleotides of exon 1C are a unique NotI site. Fragment 2 was generated as follows: human fetal brain and/or testes cDNA was amplified using primers AP1 and gene specific primer 5'TCTCTGCCCATTTGAATAAAAGCAGGCA by rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and subcloned into pT-Adv for sequencing according to manufacturer's instructions (Clontech). The 5' end of fragment 2 includes overlapping sequence with the 3' end of fragment 1, containing the same NotI site, and additionally an ApaLI site 175 bp downstream. Fragment 3 was cloned as discussed for fragment 2, but using the following primers: 5'CGCGGATCCTTTCCATGGTTTGGACTGGAT and 5'CGAAGATCTCGGGATCTTCAACAGCTCAAG. The 5' end of fragment 3 includes sequence overlapping with the 3' end of fragment 2, containing the same ApaLI site, and PANK2 sequence, in its entirety, 3' of that site. Fragment 1 was digested with NotI, fragment 2 with NotI and ApaLI, and fragment 3 with ApaLI. The fragments were ligated in a stepwise fashion; amplified by PCR using primers 1F (5'CGCGGATCCACGCTGGGGGGCTTGCTCGGGCGG) and 1R (5'CCGGAATTCCGGGATCTTCAACAGCTCAAG), resulting in PANK2 from translational start to the nucleotide immediately 5' of the stop codon (nucleotide no. 17-1396 of GenBank accession no. BK000010); and subcloned into pBSKS+ (Stratagene) at the BamHI and EcoRI sites. This construct was named phPANK2.
Building of myc-HIS-Tagged cDNA Constructs

A series of PANK2-derived carboxy-terminus myc-HIS-tagged constructs were made according to standard recombinant DNA methodologies.12 Using phPANK2 (this study) as a template, and primer pairs as described below, derivatives of hPANK2 were generated by PCR as follows: primers 1F and 1R (described above) resulted in pCTGcodon1; primers 2F (5'CGCGGATCCGCCACCATGGGGGGCTTGCTCGGGCGGCAG) and 1R resulted in pATGcodon1; primers 3F (5'CGCGGATCCACGCAGGGGGGCTTGCTCGGGCGG) and 1R resulted in pCAGcodon1; primers 4F (5'CGCGGATCCGCCACCATGGGAGGGGGCCGGCTC) and 1R generated pATGcodon14; primers 5F (5'CGCGGATCCGCCACCATGTCCGCCACCTCCGTCTCG) and 1R resulted in pDMTS; primers 1F and 2R (5'CCGGAATTCAGCCCTGCCGTGGCGCTCCAT) resulted in pCTGMTSonly. These amplicons were then subcloned into pBSKS+ (Stratagene) at the BamHI and EcoRI sites and sequenced in both directions. Finally, using BamHI and EcoRI, each fragment was excised and subcloned into the human expression vector pcDNA3.1/myc-HIS (Invitrogen), resulting in carboxy-terminus myc-HIS tags. All junctions of the constructs were sequenced. An overview of all constructs can be found in Table 1.

Table 1. 
Summary of C-terminus myc-HIS-tagged human PANK2 cDNA constructs Thumbnail image of 
Generation of Anti-PANK2 Antibody

A polyclonal chicken anti-human PANK2 antibody was raised by Aves Labs against a 14-mer synthetic peptide (RRQEPLRRRASSAS), corresponding to amino acids 48-61 (GenBank accession no. DAA00004), located downstream of the MTS. The antibody was then affinity-purified with this 14-mer peptide using Reduce-Imm Reducing Kit and SulfoLink Kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (Pierce). After concentrating, using an Amicon Ultra (Millipore), the antibody was used at 1:5000 dilution for Western blots and 1:1000 for immunofluorescence. As a control for specificity, the antibody was adsorbed for 48 h at 4°C at 10-5 M to the above 14-mer and, separately, to an 11-mer (RDVHLELKDLT) containing none of the 14-mer sequence. Only binding to the 14-mer was detected. Additionally, the antibody was shown to bind, as detected by Western blot, to E. coli-expressed human PANK2 containing the 14-mer epitope, but not to PANK2 deleted of that epitope (Johnson and Westaway, unpublished data).
Expression in HeLa Cells and COS Cells, Immunohistochemistry, and Immunofluorescence Microscopy

HeLa cells were cultured on Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (Gibco-BRL) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco-BRL) and grown at 37°C under 5% CO2. One day prior to transfection, the cells were split using 0.05% trypsin (Gibco-BRL), seeded on coverslips in 6-well plates, and cultured as described above. Some cells were then transfected with various myc-HIS-tagged cDNA constructs (described in Table 1) using Lipofectamine (Invitrogen) with Opti-MEM I-Reduced (Gibco-BRL) according to the manufacturer's recommendations using empirically derived optimized parameters. Forty-eight hours after transfection, the cells were aspirated and treated with MitoTracker Red CMXRos (Molecular Probes) according to the manufacturer's instructions. For the remainder of the protocol, care was taken to shield the cells from as much light as possible. The cells were then washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and fixed in 5% (w/v) freshly prepared paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Science) for 15 min at room temperature, followed by washing in PBS. The cells were then blocked in 2.5 mg/mL PBS bovine serum albumin (Sigma) while being permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma) for 15 min at room temperature. Following washing in PBS, the cells were incubated for 60 min at room temperature with monoclonal anti-myc at a dilution of 1:400 (Upstate Biotechnology), monoclonal anti-HIS at a dilution of 1:400 (Invitrogen), or native anti-PANK2 antibodies (1:1000).

The cells were again washed in PBS and then incubated for 60 min at room temperature with anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 at a dilution of 1:600 (Molecular Probes) or fluorescein-labeled goat anti-chicken antibodies at 1:500 (Aves Labs). Following washing in PBS, the cells were mounted in ProLong Antifade (Molecular Probes) on glass slides according to the manufacturer's instructions. The coverslips were then sealed with clear fingernail polish and dried for 20 min. The fluorescent staining pattern was viewed at 100× using a Leika DMRXA microscope. The images were digitally recorded and then colorized using Adobe Photoshop.

COS7 cells were grown in Lab-TekII chamber slides and incubated in 200 nM MitoTracker Red CMXRos (Molecular Probes) for 30 min at 37°C. Cells were then fixed for 20 min in 4% paraformaldehyde. A polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse PANK2 was raised against a 15-mer peptide (CSGEAESVRRERPGS) and was affinity-purified with the peptide. The antibody (1:200 dilution) was visualized by using a goat Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rabbit IgG antibody at 1:150 dilution (Molecular Probes). Images were visualized at 100× magnification using a Nikon E800 microscope. The images were digitally recorded and then colorized using Adobe Photoshop.
SDS-PAGE and Immunoblots

Protein assays were done using a BCA Protein Assay Reagent Kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Lysates or crude mitochondrial pellets were analyzed by 7.5% or 10% SDS-PAGE, and immunoblotting was performed according to Sambrook12 and Bio-Rad instructions. Chemiluminescent immunoblot detection was performed according to Western-Star Systems instructions (Applied Biosystems) or ECL Western Blotting Analysis System instructions (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Antibodies were used at the following dilutions: native anti-PANK2 1:5000, anti-myc 1:500 (Upstate Biotechnology), anti-HIS 1:5000 (Invitrogen), anti-CPTI 1:3000 (gift from Gebretateos Woldegiorgis, OGI-OHSU), anti-SKL motif 1:1000 (gift from Rick Rachubinski, University of Alberta), anti-BiP/GRP78 1:250 (BD Biosciences), EEA1 1:1000 (BD Biosciences), GM130 1:250 (BD Biosciences), Lamp-1 1:250 (BD Biosciences), MAP2B 1:1000 (BD Biosciences), Nucleoporin p62 1:1000 (BD Biosciences), anti-rabbit 1:6500 (Tropix), anti-chicken 1:7500 (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories), and anti-mouse 1:5000 (ECL, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). For further descriptions of antibodies, see below.
Isolation of Crude Mitochondrial Pellet and Generation of Percoll Gradient-Purified Mitochondrial Fraction

HeLa cells were cultured as described above and grown to confluency on 100 mM tissue culture plates. To collect a crude mitochondrion pellet, cells were harvested with 0.05% trypsin and transferred to a cold Falcon tube, spun at 4°C, 250g, for 2 min in a Sorvall tabletop centrifuge. The supernatant was decanted and the cells washed twice in cold PBS. The cells were resuspended in 1 mL cold buffer A (20 mM potassium HEPES, pH 7.5; 250 mM sucrose; 3 mM EDTA plus protease inhibitor cocktail [Complete, Mini, EDTA-free from Roche]) as directed by the manufacturer. The cells were transferred to a cold ground glass tissue grinder (Kontes) and were lysed by 25 strokes. Following transfer to a cold Falcon tube, the total volume was increased to 10 mL with cold buffer A and spun at 4°C at 1000g for 10 min in a Sorvall tabletop centrifuge. The supernatant (I) was saved on ice and the pellet was resuspended in 1 mL cold buffer A, transferred to the Kontes ground glass tissue grinder and lysed by 15 strokes, and spun again as described above. The resulting supernatant was combined with supernatant I and spun at 4°C at 12,000g for 10 min in a Beckman centrifuge. The resulting supernatant was concentrated using an Amicon Ultra 10,000 MWCO (Millipore) and saved for comparison on an immunoblot. The resulting crude mitochondrial pellet was resuspended in 100 µL cold buffer A, assayed by BCA Protein Assay Reagent Kit (Pierce), and stored at 4°C.

For purposes of quantifying percent protein (native PANK2 or myc-tagged PANK2) present in crude mitochondria pellet versus resulting supernatant, an equivalent percent of total volume of crude mitochondrial pellet fraction and resulting supernatant fraction was loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel and immunoblotted. Quantification of band densities, corrected for background, was done using LabWorks Image Acquisition and Analysis software (UVP BioImaging Systems).

The crude mitochondrial pellet (1450 µg) was loaded on a Percoll (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) gradient. The gradient was made as follows: 6.5 mL of 40% Percoll was overlayed with 8 mL 20% Percoll in 18-mm centrifuge tubes (Nalge). The sample was spun at 50,000g for 60 min at 4°C. Ten 1-mL fractions, collected from the top of the tube, were diluted in 2× volume buffer A, spun at 14,000 rpm for 10 min in microfuge at 4°C, pellets collected and resuspended in 100 µL 1× SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and boiled. Ten-µL samples of each fraction were loaded on each of nine SDS-PAGE gels as well as a total cell lysate sample and a control protein. Western blots were performed and probed with the following antibodies against native hPANK2, CPTI (mitochondria), GM130 (Golgi), MAP2B (microtubule), Nucleoporin p62 (nucleus), BiP/GRP78 (endoplasmic reticulum), EEA1 (endosome), and Lamp-1 (lysosome).
Building of EGFP Constructs

pEGFP-N1 (Clontech) (also referred to as pEGFP in Figure 5 later) expresses enhanced green fluorescent protein under the CMV promoter. pEGFPDATG was built as a negative control with respect to EGFP expression as follows: EGFP with the ATG start sequence deleted was amplified by PCR from pEGFP-N1 using primer pairs 5'-CTTCGAATTCTGCAGTCGACCAGCAAGGGCGAGGAGCTG-3' and 5'-ATGATCTAGAGTCGCGGCCGCTTTACTTGTACAGCTCG-3' and substituted back into pEGFP-N1 at the SalI and NotI sites. pCTGonATGon, in which both the CTG and ATG (nucleotides 31-33 and 97-99 of PANK2, GenBank accession no. BK000010) are in frame with EGFP, was constructed by PCR amplification of nucleotides 2-227 of PANK2 from previously amplified exon 1C PCR product and cloning into pEGFPDATG at SacI and SalI sites upstream of EGFP using the following primers: forward 5'-ACTCAGATCTCGAGCTCCCGCGGAGGAGGCGAGAAGGA-3' and reverse 5'-CCGACCGCGGGCGTCGACGCGCTGCTCGCCCG-3'. pCTGoffATGoff was constructed as described above for pCTGonATGon, except using reverse primer 5'-CCGACCGCGGGCGTCGACCGCTGCTCGCCCG-3', which resulted in both CTG and ATG being out of frame with EGFP. pCTGoffATGon, in which the CTG is out of frame and the ATG is in frame with EGFP, was constructed by digesting pCTGonATGon with AvaI (cuts between CTG and ATG), filling in the 4-bp overhang, and religating. This created a frameshift, moving CTG out of frame with EGFP. pCTGonATGoff, in which the CTG is in frame with EGFP and ATG is out of frame with EGFP, was digested, filled in, and religated as above, but beginning with pCTGoffATGoff resulting in CTG shifted back into frame with EGFP. All primers were from Gibco-BRL. All constructs were sequenced.

Figure 5. 
Figure 5. Open in figure viewerDownload Powerpoint slide
Initiation of translation at a CTG as evaluated by an EGFP reporter. Cells in panels A, C, E, G, I, and K were viewed using fluorescent light at excitation wavelength of 470 nm. Cells in panels B, D, F, H, J, and L were viewed using visible light and correspond to panels to their left. pEGFP is the parental vector containing only EGFP, driven by the CMV promoter. pEGFP?ATG is the parental vector with the ATG of EGFP removed. pCTGonATGon is pEGFP?ATG plus the first 212 nucleotides of PANK2 fused to the amino terminus of EGFP, with both the ATG and downstream CTG of PANK2 in frame with EGFP. pCTGoffATGoff is as in pCTGonATGon, except both the CTG and ATG are out of frame with EGFP. pCTGoffATGon is as in pCTGonATGon, except the CTG is out of frame with EGFP. pCTGonATGoff is as in pCTGonATGon, except the ATG is out of frame with EGFP. [Images shown in black and white.]

The constructs were transfected into HeLa cells using X-tremeGeneQ2 (Roche) according to the manufacturer's instructions and cultured as described above. The cells were viewed after 24 h and images captured at 10× using a Leika DMRXA microscope at excitation wavelength of 470 nm. The EGFP images were colorized using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems).
RESULTS

Predominant Localization of PANK2 to Mitochondria

Two immunofluorescence experiments demonstrated that PANK2 localizes primarily to the mitochondria. First, using an anti-human PANK2 antibody raised against a peptide corresponding to a sequence downstream of the human PANK2 MTS, we find localization of endogenous PANK2 in HeLa cells to be predominantly mitochondrial and, to a much lesser extent, cytosolic (Figs. 1A-C). Second, with an antibody raised against a murine PANK2-specific peptide corresponding to a similar sequence downstream of the MTS, fluorescence microscopy revealed staining in the mitochondria in COS7 cells, as shown in Figures 1D-F. The signal is absent in the control preimmune sera as well as in sera preadsorbed with the peptide (data not shown). As in the transfected HeLa cells, trace cytoplasmic staining was again observed. A similar pattern was seen in HEK and CACO cells with this antibody (data not shown).

Figure 1. 
Figure 1. Open in figure viewerDownload Powerpoint slide
Mitochondrial PANK2 distribution detected by indirect immunofluorescence using a PANK2 antibody. HeLa (A-C) and COS7 (D-F) cells were cultured and prepared for immunofluorescence as described in Experimental Procedures. Cells in panel A were incubated with anti-human PANK2 antibodies and labeled with fluorescein-labeled anti-chicken antibodies. Cells in panel D were incubated with an antibody against murine PANK2 and binding was visualized with Alexa Fluor 488 Green antibodies. Cells in panels B and E were incubated with MitoTracker Red CMXRos. Panels C and F are merged images. [Images shown in black and white.]

We quantitated the relative compartmentalization of endogenous PANK2 by immunoblotting the equivalent percent of total volume of crude mitochondrial pellet fraction and resulting supernatant fraction with anti-human PANK2 antibodies (Fig. 2). In agreement with the immunofluorescence results, the vast majority of native PANK2, 95%, localized to the mitochondrial pellet with 5% in the supernatant. Immunoblotting for CPTI, a mitochondrial marker protein, as a control, showed 100% of CPTI to be in the crude mitochondrial pellet.

Figure 2. 
Figure 2. Open in figure viewerDownload Powerpoint slide
Compartmentalization by immunoblot of endogenous and myc-tagged PANK2. Equivalent percent volumes of mitochondrial pellet (P) and resulting supernatant (S) were loaded. Anti-PANK2 is antibody against human PANK2. Anti-myc is antibody used to decorate transfected myc-tagged PANK2 expressed by pCTGcodon1, pATGcodon1, and pCAGcodon1 (see Table 1). Anti-CPTI is antibody to mitochondrial marker protein, CPTI. Transfected and nontransfected refer to HeLa cells. Bands were quantitated in silico (see Experimental Procedures).

Mitochondrial localization was confirmed by studying Percoll gradient-purified mitochondria. Using Percoll gradient fractions, PANK2 was found in, and only in, the same fractions as was CPTI (Fig. 3). To rule out inclusion of organelles other than mitochondria in fractions of interest, immunoblots were done, beginning with the same Percoll gradient fractions used for the anti-PANK2 and anti-CPTI immunoblotting, using antibodies against GM130 (Golgi), MAP2B (microtubule), Nucleoporin p62 (nucleus), BiP/GRP78 (endoplasmic reticulum), EEA1 (endosome), and Lamp-1 (lysosome). With the possible exception of endoplasmic reticulum, no other organelle appears to be comigrating with mitochondria (data not shown).

Figure 3. 
Figure 3. Open in figure viewerDownload Powerpoint slide
HeLa cell mitochondrial localization of PANK2 by immunoblot using Percoll gradient fractions and a native antibody. Equal volumes of Percoll gradient fractions were loaded on SDS-PAGE gels and immunoblotted. The panel labeled PANK2 was incubated with anti-human PANK2 antibody, and the panel labeled CPTI with anti-CPT1 antibody. CPT1 is a mitochondrial marker protein.

A series of transfection experiments were undertaken to clarify the role of the predicted leucine codon for translation initiation and resulting localization. We generated myc-HIS-tagged constructs derived from human PANK2 cDNA and performed transfection experiments in HeLa cells (Table 1). Figures 4A-C demonstrate that a construct of full-length human PANK2 (pCTGcodon1), initiated with the native CUG codon, results in predominantly mitochondrial localization, with a small fraction present in the cytosol. Quantifying this localization was done as previously described for endogenous PANK2, except here pCTGcodon1 transfected HeLa cells were used to generate the crude mitochondrial pellet and resulting supernatant, and immunoblotting was done with anti-myc antibodies (Fig. 2). We found 77% of the pCTGcodon1 protein localized to the mitochondrial pellet fraction, with 23% in the resulting supernatant fraction. Control CPTI was found to be entirely in the mitochondrial pellet fraction. Thus, immunofluoresence and quantitation observations on myc-tagged, expressed PANK2 and on endogenous PANK2 show localization to be predominantly mitochondrial, with a small cytosolic fraction. Further evidence is presented below supporting leucine as a translational start codon in PANK2.

Figure 4. 
Figure 4. Open in figure viewerDownload Powerpoint slide
Intracellular PANK2 distribution and identification of a mitochondrial targeting sequence as detected by indirect immunofluorescence. HeLa cells were transfected by the plasmids indicated, cultured, and prepared for immunofluorescence as described in Experimental Procedures. Cells in panels A, D, G, J, M, and P were incubated with anti-myc. Alexa Fluor 488 Green secondary antibodies were used for fluorescent labeling. Cells in panels B, E, H, K, N, and Q were incubated with MitoTracker Red CMXRos. Panels C, F, I, L, O, and R are merged images. See Table 1 for plasmid descriptions. [Images shown in black and white.]

Evidence for a Mitochondrial Targeting Signal

Deletion of the entire predicted mitochondrial sequence (pDMTS, lacking the 29 amino-terminal residues L/MGGLLGRQRLLLRMGGGRLGAPMERHGRA) causes PANK2 to be primarily cytosolic (Figs. 4D-F). In a reciprocal experiment, the predicted MTS from PANK2 (pCTGMTSonly) is sufficient for mitochondrial targeting of the myc-HIS tag (Figs. 4G-I). Use of anti-HIS antibodies for localization confirmed the results and controlled for the possibility that the anti-myc antibodies were cross-reacting with the cell's native myc (data not shown). From these data, we conclude that PANK2's predicted MTS is authentic.
Evidence for an Alternative Translational Start Site

The presence of a small fraction of PANK2 in the cytosol suggests an alternative translational start site that excludes part or all of the MTS, a possibility for which there is precedence.13 In PANK2, the first in-frame AUG codon occurs 42 bases downstream of the CUG; translation initiation here would exclude half of the MTS. Indeed, for pATGcodon14, a construct in which the first 13 codons are deleted, the majority of PANK2 is cytosolic (Figs. 4J-L).

This model would further predict that translation initiation may be less efficient with the CUG codon than with an AUG. To test this possibility, we replaced the initiating unconventional codon in pCTGcodon1 with an ATG (pATGcodon1) and found all of the resulting protein to be mitochondrial (Figs. 4M-O). By Western blotting, as described above for quantification of pCTGcodon1 protein, but here beginning with pATGcodon1 transfected cells, 100% of resulting protein was found to be in the mitochondrial pellet fraction (Fig. 2). CPTI control results were as described above. These data, taken together, suggest that the cytosolic fraction of PANK2 may be a result of the use of a downstream AUG and that CUG is an authentic translational start site.
An Allelic Variant Associated with Mislocalization of PANK2

During our initial analysis of the PANK2 gene, a variant in the initiation codon came to light. One of 15 human ESTs (expressed sequence tags) in the public database contained a glutamine codon (CAG) instead of the leucine/methionine codon (CUG) at residue 1. During sequence analysis of our patient population, we also observed a CAG allele frequency of 3.1% (7 of 224 chromosomes). However, additional deleterious mutations could be found in the PKAN patients to account for disease. Subsequent analysis of DNA from CEPH samples confirmed the polymorphism: namely, 5% (9 of 176) of chromosomes from unrelated grandparents in this study sample were found to be heterozygous for the CAG variant. In the 100 CEPH samples tested, no one was found to be homozygous for the CAG allele.

The CAG codon would not be predicted to serve as a start site for protein translation, and we anticipate that protein encoded by this variant would initiate at methionine codon 14 (see above) and be localized primarily to the cytosol. To test this hypothesis, we transformed HeLa cells with a myc-HIS-tagged PANK2 construct in which the initiating CTG was replaced with a CAG (pCAGcodon1). As shown in Figures 4P-R, this variant of PANK2 localizes mainly to the cytosol. The localization was quantified by immunoblot as described above (Fig. 2): 79% of the resulting protein was found to be in the supernatant fraction, yet 100% of the mitochondrial control protein, CPTI, was in the mitochondrial fraction. Based on this mislocalization, we could envision that carriers of the CAG allele might be deficient in mitochondrial PANK2 and might suffer a clinical consequence with time.
Evidence for a CUG Translational Initiation Codon

The localization experiments described above support CUG as a translational initiation codon and, through a set of experiments using a reporter gene initiated by the native PANK2 sequence, we provide further evidence for CUG as a translational initiation codon.

HeLa cells were transiently transfected with a series of PANK2-EGFP vectors and tested for EGFP fluorescence (Fig. 5). Cells transfected with the parental vector containing only EGFP driven by the CMV promoter (see Experimental Procedures) strongly fluoresce and serve as a positive control. Panel C is as in panel A, except the ATG start codon was removed from EGFP and serves as a negative control. In panels E-L, the first 212 nucleotides of PANK2 were fused to the amino terminus of EGFP and, as in the negative control above, the ATG of EGFP was removed. Both the native PANK2 CTG and downstream ATG are in frame with the EGFP in panel E, serving as another positive control. Conversely, in panel G, both the native PANK2 CTG and ATG are out of frame with EGFP, demonstrating that there are no alternative initiation codons in the construct. Panel I shows cells in which only the downstream ATG is in frame with EGFP and we see somewhat reduced fluorescence as compared with the positive controls. Only the CTG of PANK2 is in frame with EGFP in panel K and strong fluorescence is observed. Panels B, D, F, H, J, and L show corresponding views of cells as viewed with visible light. These data suggest that CUG in the limited native context of PANK2 is an effective translation initiation codon.
DISCUSSION

Human PANK2 localizes primarily to mitochondria, with a small fraction found in cytosol. The PANK2 gene encodes an authentic signal that is both necessary and sufficient for mitochondrial targeting. Two alternate translational start sites in PANK2 likely account for the dual localization. Our data support a less efficient translation initiation with CUG rather than AUG, with the ribosome at times bypassing this codon and employing a downstream AUG for the translational start that disrupts the MTS in PANK2.

The use of alternative translational start sites as well as dual localization has precedence. For example, NifS, a human iron-sulfur cluster assembly enzyme, is targeted to mitochondria or cytosol/nucleus based on pH-dependent initiation of protein synthesis at different AUGs.13 Other examples of alternative AUG usage include rat liver fumarase gene,14 human ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 gene,15 mouse LAP gene,16 mouse GATA-1 transcription factor gene,17 and yeast tRNA processing enzyme genes CCA1 and MOD5.18 More to the point, int-2, bFGF, and hck are similar to PANK2 in that subcellular localizations for all use alternative translation initiation at CUG vs. AUG codons.19-21 As alternative translational starts may provide flexible response to metabolic changes, CoA intermediates may regulate subcellular distribution of PANK2 through a feedback mechanism.

Interestingly, the well-studied c-myc gene provides an excellent example for discussion of PANK2. The two major protein forms of c-myc, c-Myc 1 and c-Myc 2, are derived from alternative translational starts at either a CUG or an AUG that is 42 nucleotides downstream in a configuration analogous to that of PANK2.22 Moreover, we previously noted the presence of a stem-loop structure 14 nucleotides downstream from the CUG in PANK2,2 and C-myc has a similar structure in the same position. Such stem-loops have been described in other CUG-initiated proteins and shown to enhance translation initiation at non-AUG codons by slowing the scanning complex.23 A methionine is incorporated as the first residue of c-Myc 1,22,24 and Met-tRNAiMet has been shown to recognize and initiate translation at both AUG and non-AUG codons.25,26 Thus, we would predict that the first amino acid in PANK2 is also a methionine.

We note that another start site for PANK2 translation has been proposed 330 nucleotides upstream of the CUG leucine codon27 (GenBank accession no. AF494409). However, several lines of evidence argue against this conceptual translation. First, sequence conservation (both nucleotide and predicted amino acid) between the murine, rat, and human genomic sequences is maintained only as far upstream as the CUG start codon, and sequences 5' of that diverge considerably. This observation is of significance as cross-species sequence conservation is a hallmark of protein-coding capacity. Additionally, “in-frame” stop codons are present in both the murine and rat sequences upstream of the CUG, again signaling lack of protein-coding capacity. Finally, no ESTs can be found to document that these 330 nucleotides are part of a PANK2 transcript; indeed, we were not able to verify use of this upstream sequence by RACE-PCR.

Mitochondrial localization of PANK2 is predicted to be unique among the PANKs and suggests an organelle-specific function. As CoA is required for mitochondrial function and since the final enzymes in the CoA biosynthetic pathway have been reported in mitochondria,7,8 our results shed new light on this biochemical pathway. We suggest that the mitochondria likely serve as a second site for complete de novo CoA synthesis and predict the presence of the remaining B5 metabolizing enzymes in the mitochondria. As PANK2 is expressed in all tissues examined,2 this protein probably fulfills a key function in mitochondria.

If PKAN is a mitochondrial disorder of a widely expressed protein, how do we explain the limited phenotype? One prediction of the effects of defective PANK2 is mitochondrial CoA deficiency leading to increased oxidative stress. In PKAN, the disease primarily impacts the globus pallidus and retina, which share the features of extremely high metabolic demands coupled with cellular environments that are especially prone to oxidative damage. The normally iron-rich globus pallidus demonstrates the earliest and most severe pathological changes in PKAN. The high resting metabolic activity of the globus pallidus makes this tissue especially vulnerable to oxidative stress, explaining its frequent involvement in genetic mitochondrial encephalopathies and exposure to mitochondrial toxins. Similarly, the retina is particularly susceptible to oxidative stress because of its high consumption of oxygen, its high proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids, and its exposure to visible light. Perhaps the combination of increased metabolic activity in a tissue environment at risk for oxidative damage makes these tissues especially susceptible to PANK2 deficiency.

Historically, the prominent feature of brain iron accumulation formed the basis for theories of disease pathogenesis in PKAN. Now, several lines of evidence suggest that iron deposition is a secondary phenomenon in PKAN, although still one that is likely to contribute to tissue destruction. Based on predictions of the metabolic impact of defective PANK2 and on the observation of elevated brain levels of cysteine in patients,28 we have proposed an etiology for iron accumulation in PKAN as follows: In normal brain, nonheme iron accumulates regionally and is highest in the medial globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata, the two regions most severely affected in PKAN. Phosphopantothenate, the product of pantothenate kinase, normally condenses with cysteine in the next step in CoA synthesis. In PKAN, phosphopantothenate is deficient, theoretically leading to mitochondrial cysteine accumulation. N-Pantothenoyl-cysteine and pantetheine, also substrates for phosphorylation by pantothenate kinase and both containing cysteine moieties, are predicted to accumulate in mitochondria as well. A high cysteine concentration has been found in the globus pallidus in PKAN,28 and cysteine effectively binds iron. Cysteine, itself cytotoxic, undergoes rapid auto-oxidation in the presence of iron, which results in free radical production. Further, iron-induced lipid peroxidation, a likely mechanism of secondary pathogenesis in PKAN, is enhanced by free cysteine. Since most pathologic studies of brain in patients with PKAN were done following end-stage disease, it has not been possible to discern whether mitochondrial accumulation of iron is an early feature of this disease.

Common allelic variants can confer susceptibility to certain diseases, as shown by the recent association of cardiac arrhythmia with an allele of the cardiac sodium channel gene.29 Given that defective mitochondrial PANK2 is associated with PKAN, we might reasonably predict that more subtle functional variants of PANK2 might increase the risk for neurodegeneration as well. Five percent of control chromosomes carry the PANK2 CAG variant, which results in predominantly cytosolic distribution of PANK2. Individuals carrying this allele may have a relative deficiency of mitochondrial PANK2, the effects of which may be exacerbated in tissues with high CoA demand. As a result, this polymorphism may confer susceptibility to neurodegeneration and brain iron accumulation, increasing the risk for Parkinson's disease and related disorders of oxidative stress.\