Abstract
FAD synthetase (FADS) (EC 2.7.7.2) is a key enzyme in the metabolic pathway that converts riboflavin into the redox cofactor FAD. Two hypothetical human FADSs, which are the products of FLAD1 gene, were over-expressed in Escherichia coli and identified by ESI-MS/MS. Isoform 1 was over-expressed as a T7-tagged protein which had a molecular mass of 63 kDa on SDS–PAGE. Isoform 2 was over-expressed as a 6-His-tagged fusion protein, carrying an extra 84 amino acids at the N-terminal with an apparent molecular mass of 60 kDa on SDS–PAGE. It was purified near to homogeneity from the soluble cell fraction by one-step affinity chromatography. Both isoforms possessed FADS activity and had a strict requirement for MgCl2, as demonstrated using both spectrophotometric and chromatographic methods. The purified recombinant isoform 2 showed a specific activity of 6.8 ± 1.3 nmol of FAD synthesized/min/mg protein and exhibited a KM value for FMN of 1.5 ± 0.3 µM. This is the first report on characterization of human FADS, and the first cloning and over-expression of FADS from an organism higher than yeast.

Keywords
FAD synthesis; FAD synthetase; FADS; FLAD1; FMN adenylyl transferase; Isoforms
Flavoproteins are a broad class of enzymes that catalyze a variety of biological redox reactions and require the riboflavin-derived redox cofactors FAD and FMN.

In mammals, flavin cofactors are obtained from dietary riboflavin (vitamin B2), which is actively adsorbed by intestinal cells and delivered to peripheral districts in tight association with plasma albumin [see [1], [2] and [3] for reviews]. The circulating vitamin is efficiently imported into the peripheral cells via specific plasma membrane transporter(s) [3] whose molecular counterparts in higher eukaryotes are unknown, though in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, MCH5 has been identified as the first eukaryotic gene encoding a plasma membrane riboflavin transporter [4].

Once inside the cells riboflavin is rapidly converted into catalytically active cofactors via the sequential actions of ATP:riboflavin phosphotransferase (riboflavin kinase (FK)2 (EC 2.7.1.26)), which converts the vitamin into FMN and ATP:FMN adenylyl transferase (FAD synthetase (FADS) (EC 2.7.7.2)), which adenylates FMN to FAD. Both enzymes have been purified from yeast and rat tissues, and biochemically characterized [5], [6], [7], [8], [9] and [10].

In contrast to eukaryotes, most prokaryotes have a single bifunctional protein which provides both FK and FADS activities. This protein is encoded by the gene ribF in Corynebacterium ammoniagenes and Escherichia coli [11] and [12], and by ribC in Bacillus subtilis [13]. Monofunctional prokaryotic FKs have been also cloned, characterized, and are encoded by the genes ribR in B. subtilis and mreA in Streptococcus agalactiae [14] and [15].

The first eukaryotic gene encoding a monofunctional FK was identified in S. cerevisiae and named FMN1 [16]. This gene codes for a membrane-bound protein located in both microsomes and the inner mitochondrial membrane. Other FKs have been cloned from yeasts and plants [17] and [18]. The human ortholog of Fmn1p is an 18.5 kDa protein encoded by the RFK gene, whose crystal structure has been recently determined [19].

The first eukaryotic gene for a monofunctional FADS was identified in S. cerevisiae and named FAD1 [20], and encodes a 35 kDa soluble cytosolic enzyme. To date, Fad1p is the only cloned eukaryotic FADS [20]. In contrast to Fmn1p, which is orthologous to the bacterial bifunctional enzymes, Fad1p belongs to the PAPS-reductase family and has little or no sequence similarity to the bacterial enzymes such as ribF in E. coli. Since the latter is required for E. coli viability and is unrelated to mammalian enzymes, FADS is a potential target for the development of novel antimicrobial drugs [12].

The subcellular localization of FADS in eukaryotes is a matter of debate. De Luca and Kaplan [21] first demonstrated that the enzyme responsible for FAD formation is located in the cytosol of rat liver. Since then, FADS has been purified from rat liver cytosolic fractions only as a protein running at 53 kDa on SDS–PAGE [7] and [10]. Thus, for many years it was assumed that mammalian FAD biosynthesis occurred only in the cytosol. However, using cell fractionation and activity measurements, we have demonstrated the presence of FADS activity in mitochondria from rat liver [22] and [23] and yeast [24] and [25], though the protein responsible remains to be identified.

Since most flavoproteins are located in mitochondria and since binding of FAD to mitochondrial apo-flavoenzymes occurs inside the organelle [26], [27], [28], [29] and [30], the possibility that different isoforms with compartment-specific functions may exist in eukaryotes deserves further investigation particularly in the case of human, where both biochemical characterization and subcellular localization data for FADS are lacking.

Searches in protein sequence databases for human orthologs of Fad1p revealed three predicted proteins, encoded by different transcript variants of the FLAD1 gene, the putative human ortholog of yeast FAD1. In this paper we report the cloning, over-expression, and functional characterization of FADS isoform 1 and isoform 2, which are the products, respectively, of FLAD1 transcript variant 1 (GenBank Accession No. NM_025207) and transcript variant 2 (GenBank Accession No. NM_201398). The hypothesis that one of these isoforms could represent the mitochondrial FADS isoenzyme will be discussed.

Materials and methods
Materials. All chemicals were from Sigma–Aldrich, if not otherwise specified. E. coli Rosetta(DE3) strain and pET-21a(+) plasmid were purchased from Novagen. Restriction endonucleases and other cloning reagents were purchased from Fermentas. Bacto Peptone and Bacto Yeast extract were from Difco. Chelating Sepharose Fast Flow was from Amersham Biosciences. The dye reagent for protein assay (Bio-Rad protein assay) was from Bio-Rad.

Cloning of human cDNAs coding for FADS isoforms. To clone the cDNA encoding for the isoform 1 of human FAD synthetase (hFADS1) (UniProtKB/TrEMBL Accession No. Q8NFF5; GenPept Accession No. NP_079483), total RNA was isolated from primary human fibroblasts and reverse-transcribed. The 1764 bp cDNA corresponding to the hFADS1 encoding sequence 3 was then amplified using the forward and reverse primers 5'-GCGGATCCATGGGTTGGGATTTGGGAAC-3' and 5'-CCCAAGCTTTCATGTGCGGGAGTTCCGCTC-3', containing the BamHI and HindIII sites, respectively. The amplified cDNA was cloned in the BamHI/HindIII sites of the pET-21a(+) expression vector. The resulting recombinant plasmid, defined as pET-21a(+)-hFADS1, encodes a T7-tagged fusion protein corresponding to the hFADS1 carrying the extra N-terminal sequence MASMTGGQQMGR.

The 1473 bp cDNA corresponding to the encoding sequence for the isoform 2 of human FAD synthetase (hFADS2) (UniProtKB/TrEMBL Accession No. Q8WU93; GenPept Accession No. NP_958800) was amplified from the full length cDNA RZPD (IMAGp998D2411612) clone (inserted in EcoRV/NotI sites of pCMV-SPORT6 vector) with the forward and reverse primers 5'-AGCCGAATTCATGACATCTAGGGCC-3' and 5'-GACCCTCGAGTCATGTGCGGGAGTT-3', containing the EcoRI and XhoI sites, respectively. The amplified cDNA was then cloned in the EcoRI/XhoI sites of the pET-21a(+) expression vector. The resulting recombinant plasmid, defined as pET-21a(+)-hFADS2, encodes a T7-tagged fusion protein corresponding to the hFADS2 carrying the extra N-terminal sequence MASMTGGQQMGRGSE.

Alternatively, the full length cDNA encoding for the hFADS2 was excised from the pCMV-SPORT6 vector by digestion with EcoRI/XhoI. The 1785 bp long restriction fragment was then cloned in the EcoRI/XhoI sites of the pH6EX3 expression vector [31] and [32]. The resulting recombinant plasmid, defined as pH6EX3-UTRhFADS2, encodes a fusion protein corresponding to the hFADS2 carrying an extra 84 amino acids at the N-terminal, corresponding to the plasmid-derived MSPI(H6)LVPRGSEASNSRD sequence, followed by the QGKEPVKGQNRQVPSTQDPLFPGYGPQCPVDLAGPPCLRPLFGGLGGYWRALQRGREGRT sequence, derived by translation of the 5'UTR present in the full length hFADS2 cDNA.

Expression of recombinant hFADS1 and hFADS2 proteins in E. coli. To obtain the recombinant hFADS proteins, the expression host E. coli Rosetta(DE3) strain was transformed with the pET-21a(+)-hFADS1, pET-21a(+)-hFADS2, and pH6EX3-UTRhFADS2 plasmids by calcium chloride treatment. Selection of transformed colonies was performed on LB-agar plates containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin and 34 µg/mL chloramphenicol. E. coli Rosetta(DE3) cells carrying the recombinant plasmids were inoculated in 100 mL of LB medium (1% Bacto Peptone, 0.5% Bacto Yeast extract, and 1% NaCl, pH 7.0) supplemented with 100 µg/mL ampicillin and 34 µg/mL chloramphenicol, and cultured overnight at 30 °C with rotary shaking (?200 rpm). A 50 mL-aliquot of the cell culture was transferred to 0.5 L of fresh LB medium supplemented with 100 µg/mL ampicillin, 34 µg/mL chloramphenicol, and 1 mM IPTG, to induce the expression of the recombinant protein. Growth was continued for 8 h at 30 °C, then bacteria were harvested by centrifugation at 3000g for 10 min at 4 °C and the pellets stored at -20 °C. The bacterial pellet (about 3 g wet weight) was thawed on ice for 15 min and re-suspended in 30 mL start buffer (500 mM NaCl, 40 mM Hepes–Na, pH 7.4) supplemented with 0.2 mL of Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (P8849, Sigma–Aldrich) and 0.5 mM PMSF. Cells were disrupted by mild sonication at 4 °C (three pulses for 60, 30, and 30 s at 100 W with 60 s intermission) using a Branson Sonifier 250. The soluble and the insoluble cell fractions were separated by centrifugation of the cell lysate at 20,000g for 30 min at 4 °C. The pellet (inclusion bodies and cell debris), containing the insoluble over-expressed proteins, was re-suspended in 15 mL start buffer, aliquoted, and used for SDS–PAGE analysis and FADS activity assay. The supernatant, containing the soluble over-expressed proteins, was used for SDS–PAGE analysis, FADS activity assay, and further protein purification (see below).

Purification of recombinant 6-His-UTRhFADS2. A 30 mL-aliquot of the soluble cell fraction, obtained from E. coli Rosetta(DE3) strain transformed with the pH6EX3-UTRhFADS2 plasmid, was applied onto a Chelating Sepharose Fast Flow column (3 mL packed resin), previously charged with 150 mM NiCl2, according to the producer’s protocol, and equilibrated with the start buffer. The column was first washed with 30 mL start buffer, then developed with a step gradient of 10, 50, 100, and 500 mM imidazole in the same buffer. At each step of the purification procedure, the FADS activity was measured (see below) and the purity of the FADS protein was checked by SDS–PAGE.

Measurement of FADS enzymatic activity. FADS activity was measured spectrophotometrically in a standard assay at 37 °C as described [23], [24] and [25], using an Ultrospec 3100pro spectrophotometer (Amersham Biosciences). Unless otherwise indicated, the substrate concentration was 10 µM FMN and 5 mM ATP. Prior to the assay, endogenous bacterial FAD was removed by ultrafiltration using Microcon 10 microcentrifuge filters (Amicon).

FADS activity was also assessed under the same experimental conditions by HPLC. Newly synthesized FAD present in neutralized perchloric extracts of the reaction mixture was measured by means of a Gilson HPLC system including a model 306 pump and a model 307 pump equipped with a FP-2020 Plus Jasco fluorescence detector and Unipoint system software. Perchloric extraction and chromatographic analysis were performed essentially as described in [23], [24], [25] and [33].

Mass spectrometry. In gel trypsinolysis of the over-expressed hFADS proteins was performed using an Investigator Progest (Genomic Solutions, Huntingdon, UK) robotic digestion system, as previously described [34]. The resulting mixtures of peptides were characterized by tandem electrospray HPLC mass spectrometry using a Q-Tof spectrometer interfaced to a Waters CapLC (Waters, Manchester, UK) chromatograph. Uninterpreted tandem mass spectra were correlated to entries in SwissProt/TREMBL using ProteinLynx Global server (version 1.1, Waters, Manchester, UK) as previously described [35], [36] and [37]. Candidate identifications were verified by manual interpretation of the spectra.

Other assays. Protein concentration was measured by the method of Bradford [38], using BSA as standard.

Proteins were separated by 8% SDS–PAGE, performed according to Laemmli [39]. Quantitative evaluation of Coomassie-stained protein bands was carried out using the Chemidoc imaging system equipped with Quantity One software (Bio-Rad), as previously described [32].

Results
Searches of Ensembl (www.ensembl.org) and Entrez Gene (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene) databases identified FLAD1 gene, localized to chromosome 1, as the putative human ortholog of yeast FAD1 gene. Two alternatively spliced transcripts encoding distinct isoforms have been observed. The putative protein encoded by transcript variant 1 (GenBank Accession No. NM_025207 = human FADS isoform 1 (hFADS1: UniProtKB/TrEMBL Accession No. Q8NFF5; GenPept Accession No. NP_079483)), is a 587-amino acid polypeptide, with a predicted molecular mass of 65,266 Da ( Fig. 1). Transcript variant 2 (GenBank Accession No. NM_201398) lacks a segment in the 5' region and uses a downstream start codon. Thus, the resulting FADS isoform 2 (hFADS2; UniProtKB/TrEMBL Accession No. Q8WU93; GenPept Accession No. NP_958800) is a 490-amino acid N-terminally truncated polypeptide with a predicted molecular mass of 54,188 Da ( Fig. 1).

Full-size image ( K)
Fig. 1. 
Comparison of hFADS1 and hFADS2 amino acid sequences. The deduced amino acid sequences of hFADS1 (Q8NFF5_HUMAN) and hFADS2 (Q8WU93_HUMAN) proteins are shown by one-letter symbols. Sequence alignment was carried out by Clustal W. Dashes are gaps introduced to maximize alignment. Asterisks mark the identical residues. The boxed sequence corresponds to the mitochondrial targeting peptide of hFADS1 predicted by TargetP program (see Table 1). Bold style indicates the internal amino acid sequences that were determined by ESI-MS/MS analysis. Shading in grey indicates the sequenced peptides matching with Q8NFF5_HUMAN protein, whereas underlines indicate that matching with Q8WU93_HUMAN protein.
Figure options
Analysis of hFADS1 and hFADS2 sequences by iPSORT, TargetP, and MITOPROT protein sorting signal prediction programs indicates that hFADS1 has an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting peptide, whereas hFADS2 does not (Table 1, see also Fig. 1). PSORT II however indicated a cytoplasmic localization for both isoforms (Table 1).

Table 1.
Prediction of protein sorting signals and subcellular localization
Entry	Prediction program
iPSORT	MITOPROT	TargetP	PSORT II
Q8NFF5_HUMAN	Having a mTP	Probability of export to mitochondria: 0.7284	Having a mTP (score = 0.883)	Localization assignment: cytoplasmic (69.6% probability)
Predicted cleavage site = 17
Localization assignment: mitochondrial

Q8WU93_HUMAN	Not having SP or mTP	Probability of export to mitochondria: 0.1146	Not having SP (score = 0.077) or mTP (score = 0.193)	Localization assignment: cytoplasmic (65.2% probability)
Localization assignment: other than mitochondrial or secretory pathway
The deduced amino acid sequences of hFADS1 (Q8NFF5_HUMAN) and hFADS2 (Q8WU93_HUMAN) proteins were analyzed with iPSORT (http://hc.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp/iPSORT/), MITOPROT (http://ihg.gsf.de/ihg/mitoprot.html), TargetP (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TargetP/), and PSORT II (http://psort.nibb.ac.jp/form2.html), to predict the presence of protein sorting signals (secretory signal peptide, SP or mitochondrial targeting peptide, mTP) and protein subcellular localization.

Table options
To demonstrate that both hFADS1 and hFADS2 actually possess FADS activity, we isolated their coding cDNA for subsequent cloning and expression in E. coli.

Expression of hFADS1
The recombinant pET-21a(+)-hFADS1 plasmid, encoding the hypothetical hFADS1 fused with the extra N-terminal sequence MASMTGGQQMGR containing a T7-tag, was constructed and used for heterologous expression of the protein in the E. coli Rosetta(DE3) strain. Optimal expression was obtained 8 h after induction with 1 mM IPTG at 30 °C. Electrophoresis of the cell lysate showed the presence of a heavily stained protein band ( Fig. 2, lane 4) which, by densitometry, constituted about 10% of the total cell protein and was virtually absent from the non-induced cell lysate ( Fig. 2, lane 3). The cell lysate was separated into insoluble (inclusion bodies and cell debris) and soluble fractions, and was analyzed by SDS–PAGE. As shown in Fig. 2, the expressed protein band was enriched in the insoluble fraction, which contained 85% of the expressed protein ( Fig. 2, lane 6) the remainder being in the soluble fraction ( Fig. 2, lane 8). Virtually no expressed protein was detected in either fraction from the non-induced cells ( Fig. 2, lanes 5 and 7). The apparent molecular mass of the over-expressed protein was about 63 kDa, by SDS–PAGE, consistent with the value 66,502 Da calculated by the Expasy tool Compute pI/MW.

Full-size image (35 K)
Fig. 2. 
Expression of recombinant hFADS1. Proteins were separated by 8% SDS–PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Lane 1, BSA (1 µg); lane 2, molecular weight markers; lane 3, non-induced cell lysate (10 µg out of 175 mg); lane 4, IPTG-induced cell lysate (10 µg out of 189 mg); lane 5, non-induced pellet (8 µg out of 61 mg); lane 6, IPTG-induced pellet (11 µg out of 57 mg); lane 7, non-induced supernatant (11 µg out of 81 mg); lane 8, IPTG-induced supernatant (22 µg out of 107 mg).
Figure options
Expression and purification of 6-His-UTRhFADS2
The recombinant pET-21a(+)-hFADS2 plasmid, encoding hFADS2, was also constructed but unfortunately, the heterologous expression of the T7-tagged fusion protein was not achieved in the IPTG-induced E. coli. Thus, a different plasmid, pH6EX3-UTRhFADS2, was constructed. This plasmid encoded hFADS2 carrying at its N-terminus an extra 84 amino acids including both the plasmid-derived MSPI(H6)LVPRGSEASNSRD sequence and 61 amino acids derived by translation of the 5'UTR present in the target cDNA.

Optimal heterologous expression of 6-His-UTRhFADS2 in E. coli Rosetta(DE3) occurred 8 h from induction with 1 mM IPTG at 30 °C. After electrophoresis, a heavily stained protein band ( Fig. 3, lane 4) was obtained, accounting for about 16% of the total cell protein, which was virtually absent in the non-induced cell lysate ( Fig. 3, lane 3). The cell lysate was separated into insoluble and soluble fractions as before ( Fig. 3, lanes 5 and 6, respectively), and about 60% of the recombinant hFADS2 was recovered in the soluble cell fraction. The apparent molecular mass was about 60 kDa, in good agreement with the calculated value of 63,425 Da.

Full-size image (29 K)
Fig. 3. 
Expression and purification of recombinant 6-His-UTRhFADS2. Proteins were separated by 8% SDS–PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Lane 1, BSA (1 µg); lane 2, molecular weight markers; lane 3, non-induced cell lysate (20 µg out of 206 mg); lane 4, IPTG-induced cell lysate (20 µg out of 204 mg); lane 5, IPTG-induced pellet (20 µg out of 42 mg ); lane 6, IPTG-induced supernatant (20 µg out of 161 mg); lane 7, protein eluted with 100 mM imidazole (f. 100, 2 µg out of 0.5 mg ); lane 8, the 6-His-UTRhFADS2 protein eluted with 500 mM imidazole (f. 500, 2 µg out of 4 mg).
Figure options
The recombinant protein was purified from the soluble fraction by chromatography on a Ni2+-chelating column (Fig. 3, lanes 7 and 8). A nearly homogeneous 60 kDa protein was recovered in the 500 mM imidazole eluate (Fig. 3, lane 8). The yield was about 7 mg/L of cell culture (5–9 mg/L in three different preparations).

Molecular identification of the expressed hFADS recombinant proteins
The over-expressed protein bands present in the IPTG-induced E. coli Rosetta(DE3) cells transformed with pET-21a(+)-hFADS1 and pH6EX3-UTRhFADS2 plasmids were excised from SDS–polyacrylamide gel, trypsin-digested, and analyzed by ESI-MS/MS. The tryptic peptides mapped to the deduced amino acid sequences of hFADS1 (Q8NFF5_HUMAN) and hFADS2 (Q8WU93_HUMAN) proteins, as shown in Fig. 1, with 140 and 100 matching amino acids, respectively. Detection of the peptide VFLEGSTR from the extended N-terminal region of hFADS1 unequivocally identifies the 63 kDa protein as isoform 1.

Biochemical and functional characterization of hFADS recombinant proteins
To demonstrate that the over-expressed recombinant hFADS1 protein actually has FADS activity, the cell fractions obtained from non-induced and IPTG-induced E. coli were incubated with the substrates of FADS, FMN (10 µM) and ATP (5 mM), in the absence or presence of Mg2+, which is specifically required by the cytosolic rat and yeast enzymes [10] and [5]. Flavins and other small molecules were depleted by ultrafiltration prior to the assay.

Fig. 4A shows a typical experiment using the soluble fractions from non-induced and IPTG-induced E. coli cells carrying the pET-21a(+)-hFADS1 plasmid. FAD synthesis rate was measured enzymatically ( Fig. 4B, by exploiting the ability of newly synthesized FAD to reactivate the apo-enzyme of d-amino acid oxidase (EC 1.4.3.3). The rate of d-Alanine oxidation was measured as the rate of NADH oxidation in the lactate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.27)-coupled reaction, followed photometrically at 340 nm. This rate is proportional to the concentration of FAD ( Fig. 4C). When the soluble cell fraction (0.011 mg), obtained from IPTG-induced E. coli, was incubated for 15 min at 37 °C in the presence of FADS substrates and MgCl2 (5 mM), a decrease of NADH absorbance was observed. Its rate increased with time up to a constant value (0.077 ?A/min after 6 min). This value corresponded to 0.53 nmol FAD synthesized/min/mg protein. When the soluble cell fraction was incubated with FMN and ATP in the absence of MgCl2, the rate of the decrease in absorbance was significantly lower (0.0066 ?A/min). This value was similar to that measured with the soluble cell fraction obtained from non-induced recombinant E. coli cells, both in the absence and presence of Mg2+. Thus, FAD synthesis catalyzed by recombinant hFADS1 protein was largely prevented when Mg2+ was omitted from the incubation mixture. The residual FADS-specific activity measured in the absence of Mg2+, or with the soluble cell fraction from non-induced E. coli was less than 5% of that measured with the IPTG-induced bacterial fraction, and is presumably due to endogenous bacterial FADS (see below).

Full-size image (24 K)
Fig. 4. 
Enzymatic evidence of FAD synthesis as catalyzed by hFADS1. In (A), the soluble cell fraction, obtained by non-induced or IPTG-induced E. coli Rosetta(DE3) cells carrying the pET-21a(+)-hFADS1 plasmid, was depleted from free flavins and other low molecular mass molecules by an ultrafiltration procedure. The protein fraction (0.011 mg protein) was incubated at 37 °C in 100 µL of 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, in the presence of FMN (10 µM) and ATP (5 mM), either in the absence or presence of MgCl2 (5 mM). After 15 min incubation, the reaction was stopped by boiling for 3 min followed by centrifugation at 14,000g for 4 min at 4 °C. The amount of FAD present in the supernatant was enzymatically assayed, as reported in Materials and methods and schematized in (B), by measuring the activity of reconstituted holo-d-AAO (derived from FAD binding to apo-d-AAO). The rate of d-Ala (25 mM) oxidation was measured as the rate of NADH (180 µM) oxidation in the LDH-coupled reaction, followed photometrically at 340 nm, and calculated as a tangent to the linear part of the progress curve. This rate proved to be proportional to the FAD concentration, as shown in (C), where a calibration curve obtained by incubating the apo-d-AAO with standard FAD solutions is reported.
Figure options
The FADS activity associated with the insoluble cell fraction from IPTG-induced bacteria carrying the pET-21a(+)-hFADS1 plasmid was also measured. The pellet was solubilized by treatment with Lubrol PX (0.3 mg/mg protein) for 10 min at 0 °C, and an aliquot of the detergent-treated fraction (0.010 mg) was used for the FADS activity assay, as described in Fig. 4. The insoluble cell fraction showed a specific activity of 0.15 nmol/min/mg protein. The specific activity of the Lubrol-treated soluble cell fraction under the same experimental conditions was 0.43 nmol/min/mg protein. These data indicate that the majority of the active protein was recovered in the soluble fraction and that most of the protein in the pellet was inactive.

In Table 2 the FADS activity of bacterial cells over-expressing the 6-His-UTRhFADS2 protein was measured spectrophotometrically, as described in Fig. 4. The total FADS activity of the soluble cell fraction of IPTG-induced bacteria corresponded to the total activity of the cell lysate, indicating that all the active protein was recovered in the soluble fraction and, consequently, the protein contained in the insoluble cell fraction was inactive. The total FADS activity in the soluble fraction of the lysate of non-induced bacteria was less than 5% of that found in IPTG-induced bacteria.

Table 2.
Purification of 6-His-UTRhFADS2 from IPTG-induced E. coli Rosetta(DE3) cells carrying the pH6EX3-UTRhFADS2 plasmid
Step	Total protein (mg)	Total activity (nmol/min)	Specific activity (nmol/min/mg)	Yield (%)	Purification (fold)
Cell lysate	172	101	0.59	100	1
Soluble cell fraction	137	125	0.91	124	1.5
Ni2+-Chelating Sepharose f. 500	4.5	33	7.4	33	12.5
Table options
The ability of the purified 6-His-UTRhFADS2 protein to catalyze conversion of FMN into FAD was assessed in the presence and absence of MgCl2 (5 mM). In a typical experiment, the purified protein was incubated at 37 °C with FMN (10 µM) and ATP (5 mM), and the amount of FAD was measured by HPLC (Fig. 5A, panel a). The amount of FAD increased with incubation time at a rate equal to 7.8 nmol/min/mg protein (Fig. 5A, panel b). FAD synthesis was abolished in the absence of MgCl2.

Full-size image (43 K)
Fig. 5. 
(A) HPLC evidence of FAD synthesis as catalyzed by the purified 6-His-UTRhFADS2 protein. The purified 6-His-UTRhFADS2 protein (1 µg) was incubated at 37 °C as described in the legend of Fig. 4A. At the indicated incubation times, the reaction was stopped by perchloric acid addition and flavins present in 80 µL of neutralized perchloric extracts were separated by HPLC and fluorimetrically revealed, as reported in Materials and methods. Panel (a) shows the chromatographic peak of FAD formed after 5 or 15 min incubation with FMN and ATP, corrected for the peak of FAD measured in the reaction mixture at the starting incubation time (10 s). In (b) the amount of newly synthesized FAD measured in the reaction mixture was expressed as nmol/mg protein and reported as a function of the incubation time. (B) Some features of the FAD synthesis reaction as catalyzed by the purified 6-His-UTRhFADS2 protein. The purified 6-His-UTRhFADS2 protein (0.2–1 µg in (a) and 1 µg in (b)) was incubated with FMN (10 µM in (a) and 1–25 µM in (b)) and ATP (5 mM), in the presence of MgCl2 (5 mM), as described in the legend of Fig. 4A. After 15-min incubation, FAD present in the reaction mixture was measured enzymatically as described in Materials and methods. Panel (a) shows the dependence of the rate of FAD synthesis, expressed as pmol/min, on the purified 6-His-UTRhFADS2 protein amount. Panel (b) shows the dependence of the rate of FAD synthesis, expressed as nmol/min × mg protein, on FMN concentration.
Figure options
The rate of FAD synthesis was linearly related to amount of the purified protein used, as expected for an enzymatic reaction (Fig. 5B, panel a). A specific activity of 7.4 nmol/min/mg protein was calculated, in good agreement with the value obtained from HPLC measurements.

The purified protein had a specific activity of 6.8 ± 1.3 nmol/min/mg protein, measured as a mean of three experiments with three different preparations, with a purification factor of 12 ± 2 with respect to the soluble fraction of the cell extract (see also Table 2).

The dependence of the FADS reaction rate on the FMN concentration (Fig. 5B, panel b) shows typical saturation behavior; the experimental data fitted by the Michaelis–Menten equation gave a KM of 1.5 ± 0.3 µM and a Vmax of 6.1 ± 0.3 nmol/min/mg protein.

The same experiments performed with the soluble fraction from non-induced cells gave a KM of 1.1 µM and a Vmax of 38.4 pmol/min/mg protein. This residual FAD synthetase activity was presumably due to the bacterial enzyme, and was 70% inhibited when using FMN concentrations higher than 4 µM (data not shown) as would be expected for the prokaryotic enzyme [40].

Discussion
Despite the crucial roles of FAD-dependent enzymes in bioenergetics and cellular regulation [1], [34], [41], [42] and [43], we know little about the enzyme responsible for FAD synthesis in humans. Fad1p, the product of the S. cerevisiae FAD1 gene, is the only eukaryotic FADS cloned to date [20]. Over-expression of recombinant hFADS has been reported as an ‘unpublished result’ [12]; but no further details were provided.

The present report demonstrates the over-expression in E. coli of two putative isoforms of human FADS encoded by two alternatively spliced transcripts of FLAD1, the human ortholog of yeast FAD1.

The cDNA encoding hFADS1 was cloned into a pET-21-a(+) expression vector and over-expressed in E. coli Rosetta(DE3) cells as an N-terminally T7-tagged fusion protein. Since over-expression of hFADS2 in this system failed, an alternative expression vector pH6EX3 [31] and [32] was used instead, which enabled expression of the protein in E. coli Rosetta(DE3) cells as an N-terminally His-tagged fusion protein carrying an 84-residue N-terminal extension. This allowed efficient production of soluble recombinant protein and its simple purification to near homogeneity on a nickel-chelating resin.

The identity of the over-expressed proteins was confirmed by ESI-MS/MS of tryptic peptides after in situ proteolysis, and their ability to synthesize FAD from FMN and ATP was demonstrated by spectrophotometric and chromatographic methods. As previously reported for eukaryotic FADSs [5] and [10], and in contrast to bacterial counterparts [11], the human isoenzymes have a strict requirement for MgCl2. The specific activities of the purified recombinant enzymes were similar to that of enzyme purified from rat liver [8] and [10]. The KM value for FMN, however, was 1.5 ± 0.3 µM, 10-fold lower than that measured for the rat liver enzyme [7].

The existence, in humans, of different FADS isoforms raises the question of their physiological functions. Since the mRNAs sequenced to date, encoding hFADS1 (GenBank Accession No. AF520568) and hFADS2 (GenBank Accession Nos. BC021096, AF481877, and BC032323), derived from skin in the first case, and liver and brain in the second, a tissue-specific role is conceivable. However, the bioinformatics prediction of different subcellular targeting (Table 1) is more consistent with a compartment-specific function. This analysis indicated that hFADS1 has an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting peptide whereas hFADS2 does not, suggesting that isoform 1 is a mitochondrial enzyme. Further study of the kinetic and molecular properties and subcellular distributions of the two isoforms is needed to confirm this hypothesis.